[[PAGE 1]]
AAE Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics in Endodontics | Page 1
AAE Position Statement
INTRODUCTION
The spectrum of endodontic pathosis includes many conditions for which
dentists and endodontists determine that it is appropriate to prescribe
antibiotics. Some of these conditions involve purely an inflammatory
reaction, and some involve various stages of infection. This infection may
be localized to the pulp and periapical tissues, and it may be spreading
to regional lymph nodes, or systemically. This document is intended to
present the available evidence related to prescribing antibiotics, highlight
appropriate clinical recommendations and identify gaps in knowledge for
which personal judgment is the best guide for assessing risks and benefits in
this practice.
This document is not intended to be an exhaustive systematic review on
the subject. It will also not address the systemic or topical application of
antibiotics following traumatic injuries to teeth (which are addressed in
other AAE guidelines), and the use of antibiotics as intracanal medicaments.
Finally, this document is not intended to present new knowledge in the field.
Overall risks and benefits of prescribing systemic antibiotics
Antibiotics are an important class of drugs. Clearly, the benefits of correct use
of antibiotics include the resolution of infection, prevention of the spread of
disease and minimization of serious complications of disease. Up to 50% of all
antibiotics are prescribed or used incorrectly. Risks associated with the use of
antibiotics include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and stomach cramps because of
the disturbances of the gut microflora.
A particular concern to the use of oral antibiotics is the development of
Clostridium difficile infection. C. difficile was responsible for almost half a
million infections and was associated with approximately 29,000 deaths
in 2011 (1). Among the antibiotics prescribed for endodontic infections,
clindamycin, amoxicillin, cephalosporins are commonly associated with C.
difficile infection, whereas macrolides and metronidazole are less commonly
so (2). Other side effects include the development of yeast infections in the
mouth or vagina, again resulting from an imbalance in the body’s normal flora.
Antibiotics can also cause allergic reactions ranging from rash, skin reactions,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome to breathing difficulty and anaphylaxis.
About This Document
This paper is designed to
provide scientifically based
guidance to clinicians
regarding the use of antibiotics
in endodontic treatment.
Thank you to the Special
Committee on Antibiotic Use in
Endodontics: Ashraf F. Fouad,
Chair, B. Ellen Byrne, Anibal R.
Diogenes, Christine M. Sedgley
and Bruce Y. Cha.
©2017
Distribution Information
AAE members may reprint
this position statement for
distribution to patients or
referring dentists.
AAE Guidance on
the Use of Systemic
Antibiotics in
Endodontics
The guidance in this
statement is not intended
to substitute for a clinician’s
independent judgment in
light of the conditions and
needs of a specific patient.
[[PAGE 2]]
Access additional resources at www.aae.org
Antibiotics are essential medications but their overuse and
misuse are creating resistant bacteria that are not susceptible
to any antibiotics. Each year at least two million people in the
U.S. become infected with multidrug resistant bacteria and
23,000 deaths have been attributed to these infections (3, 4).
Use of adjunctive antibiotics in addition to adequate
debridement and surgical drainage
The key to successful management of infection of endodontic
origin is adequate debridement of the infected root canal
and drainage for both soft and hard tissue. The objectives
for treatment of infections of endodontic origin are removal
of the pathogenic microorganisms, their by-products, and
pulpal debris from the infected root canal system that caused
the periapical pathosis and establishment of conditions
favorable for the lesion to resolve. In addition to adequate
debridement of the root canal system, localized soft tissue
swelling of endodontic origin should be incised and drained
concurrently. Studies have shown that adjunctive antibiotics
are not effective in preventing or ameliorating signs and
symptoms in cases with irreversible pulpitis, symptomatic
apical periodontitis, or localized acute apical abscess, when
adequate local debridement, medication and incision for
drainage, if indicated, have been achieved (5-11).
When using adjunctive antibiotics in addition to adequate
debridement and surgical drainage, such as in cases with
spreading infections, the practitioner should use the shortest
effective course of antibiotics, minimize the use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics and monitor the patient closely.
Use of antibiotics in the absence of adequate debridement
and surgical drainage
As noted before, there is evidence from randomized clinical
trials and systematic reviews to indicate that supplemental
antibiotics following adequate debridement and drainage in
cases of localized endodontic infections is ineffective (5-8). It
is also the standard of care to prescribe primary or adjunctive
antibiotics in conjunction with local debridement and surgical
drainage for patients who have spreading infections, and to
monitor their progress closely as these prescriptions are made
empirically and may be ineffective or insufficient for adequate
treatment.
However, the literature is not clear on indications, efficacy
or duration of antibiotics for cases in which the practitioner
is not able to render local debridement and drainage at the
time of patient presentation, or in cases that are complex and
the efficacy of local treatment may not be completed. In these
cases, it is not known whether systemic antibiotic therapy
would provide sufficient relief of symptoms and prevention
of spread of infection to warrant a prescription, since
etiology of the infection may not have been fully addressed.
Furthermore, the answer to these questions may not be
feasible to determine through objective research in the future,
as the necessary study design may be considered unethical to
patients.
The literature contains many studies that may not reach
contemporary design standards that eliminate bias in research,
and much anecdotal evidence that promote prescription of
antibiotics for the patient’s comfort and to alleviate their
apprehension (12-14). Likewise, there are several surveys that
show that both general dentists and endodontists routinely
prescribe antibiotics for patients with dental pain (15, 16).
This leads to the question of whether prescribing antibiotics
for patients in these situations is appropriate, warranted and
defensible from a medico-legal perspective.
This controversy is somewhat similar to that surrounding
the need for, and efficacy of, prophylactic antibiotics in
cases where there is little evidence to their efficacy. An
example of this would be to prevent late prosthetic joint
infection following a dental appointment. However, what
is different here is the concern about patient comfort and
fear of spreading of the infection systemically. The issue is
further complicated by the fact that many patients perceive
improvement in their condition after taking antibiotics, at least
in part due to a strong placebo effect that antibiotics may have
(17).
Ultimately, dentists and endodontists must weigh the benefits
and risks of antibiotics, as previously stated, and make an
informed decision with their patients on the appropriateness
of using antibiotics in these cases. One strategy that may be
useful is to educate the patient about the signs and symptoms
of a spreading infection and give the patient a “stand-by”
antibiotics prescription. The patient would only fill the
prescription and call the prescriber’s office, if he/she perceives
this type of infection to be occurring, prior to receiving
definitive care.
[[PAGE 3]]
AAE Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics in Endodontics | Page 3
Comparison of the efficacy of different types, dosage and
duration of antibiotics
The therapeutic use of antibiotics relies on achieving at least
the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the drug, against
sensitive microorganisms in the site of infection. In the case of
advanced endodontic infections, the dental pulp tissue after
succumbing to liquefaction necrosis is no longer vascularized,
and orally administered drugs are unable to reach the site of
infection. Therefore, the drug distribution is restricted to the
surrounding vascularized tissues. However, in cases of apical
abscess, the presence of pus limits vascular supply, and contain
cellular debris and proteins that can bind and sequester
antibiotics making these drugs less effective in the absence of
adequate drainage (18).
Thus, antibiotics should only be used as adjuvant therapies
in cases with evidence of systemic involvement (fever,
malaise, cellulitis and/or lymphadenopathies) following
adequate endodontic disinfection and abscess drainage if
swelling is present (8, 19). In addition, patients who are
immunocompromised or have predisposing conditions such as
previous endocarditis should be medicated as a prophylactic
measure. It is important to note that administration of
antibiotics in the absence of the above-mentioned reasons has
no evidence of therapeutic benefit (6, 9). Lastly, in the cases
of a therapeutic indication, the choice of the antibiotic agent,
dosage and duration is typically made in an empirical fashion.
Penicillin VK and amoxicillin, both beta-lactam antibiotics,
are the first line of antibiotics chosen as adjunct therapeutic
agents in endodontics in the United States of America and
Europe (20-22). These drugs act by binding and inhibiting the
activity of several bacterial proteins called penicillin binding
proteins (PBP) involved in the synthesis of the peptidoglycan
cell wall in susceptible both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria (23). These drugs have been found to be highly
effective against isolates from infected root canal systems that
are composed primarily of facultative and obligate anaerobes
(24-26, 35).
Amoxicillin demonstrates greater efficacy and therapeutic
value because:
1. It has broader spectrum and is more effective than
penicillin VK against certain gram-negative anaerobes due
to better microbial penetration;
2. It is more readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract than penicillin VK, which is poorly absorbed and its
accumulation in the GI tract is associated with depletion of
commensal flora and digestive disturbances;
3. Its absorption is not impaired by food reaching peak
plasma levels within 2 hours of ingestion;
4. Only approximately 20% of absorbed amoxicillin is
protein-bound in the plasma, being more readily available;
5. It has significantly greater half-life than penicillin VK
requiring doses to be taken 2-3 times a day as opposed to
4 times daily for penicillin VK (23, 27, 28).
The recommended dose regimen for amoxicillin is 500 mg
three times a day (with or without a loading dose of 1,000 mg)
for adults. Although these doses are well established based on
pharmacokinetic studies and designed to establish maximum
effective doses in the plasma, there is far less evidence to
support the duration of treatment. Most practitioners usually
prescribe antibiotics in courses of 3 to 7 days (15, 29).
Interestingly, some evidence suggests that perhaps shorter
courses (2-3 days) may be successfully used as adjuvant
therapies (30, 31). The decision of using antibiotics for
longer periods (7 to 10 days) is largely based on studies and
clinical practice of treating infections whose etiology is not
fully identified or the treatment of bloodstream infections in
hospitalized patients.
This clinical indication and use of antibiotics differ from the
endodontic use as an adjunct therapy to limit the spread and
the systemic manifestation of the infection following adequate
surgical debridement and establishment of drainage. Moreover,
therapies lasting 7 days with amoxicillin have been shown to
increase the population of resistant strains (32). It is estimated
that approximately 30% of severe dento-alveolar infections
have strains resistant to penicillin-like drugs (33). Increased
presence of resistance strains has been associated with over-
prescription of this class of drugs.
This indiscriminate antibiotic use has selected strains that
possess many resistance mechanisms against beta-lactam
antibiotics. These include:
1. constitutive expression of high molecular weight
penicillin-binding proteins (PBP) that have lower affinity
to beta-lactam antibiotics;
2. expression of beta-lactamase (also known as penicillinase)
enzymes and
3. drug efflux pumps, particularly in certain gram-positive
strains (34).
[[PAGE 4]]
Access additional resources at www.aae.org
For this reason, if symptoms are not improved after
endodontic debridement and/or drainage, amoxicillin may be
combined with clavulanic acid (125 mg bid or tid), which is
a beta-lactamase inhibitor and increases the susceptibility of
penicillin resistant strains.
This combination has been shown to be effective against 100%
of cultivable endodontic bacteria, increasing the spectrum of
amoxicillin in persistent infections (25, 35, 36). However, the
use of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid combinations should not be
done indiscriminately as there are potentially significant side
effects that include gastrointestinal and hepatic disturbances
(37).
Although penicillin and amoxicillin are the most prescribed
antibiotics, they have a side effect profile that ranges
from gastrointestinal disturbances, hepatic toxicity to
severe anaphylactic allergic reactions. It is estimated that
approximately 8% of the population using health care in
the U.S. have allergic reactions to penicillin (38). There is
well-reported cross-reactivity of penicillin allergy with
cephalosporins (39), with a total prevalence of 1% of the
American population taking antibiotics being also allergic to
cephalosporins (38).
In susceptible patients, immunoglobulin E (IgE) against
breakdown products of penicillin is readily detected in patients
with a history of penicillin allergic reactions (40). Anaphylactic
types of reactions are the most severe manifestation of
allergy to beta-lactam antibiotics but are the least prevalent
(41). Thus, these drugs should be avoided in patients with
a previous history of hypersensitivity, or discontinued
in patients without a history but with presentation of
hypersensitivity, to avoid life-threatening anaphylactic
reactions.
Clindamycin is the first drug of choice for patients with a
history of hypersensitivity to penicillin drugs. This drug
is a lincosamide antibiotic that acts by binding to the 50S
ribosomal subunit, suppressing protein synthesis (42).
Therefore, its effects are mainly bacteriostatic, although
bactericidal effects can be achieved with therapeutic doses.
It has been shown to be effective against 75% of cultivable
endodontic pathogens (35, 36, 43). It has very good spectrum,
with coverage against both facultative and obligate anaerobic
bacteria.
Clindamycin is readily absorbed after oral administration,
which is not impaired by concomitant food consumption,
reaching peak plasma levels in 1 hour (9 μg/ml after a loading
dose of 600 mg in adults). The drug is widely distributed in
the body, including bone (44). The recommended dosage for
infections of endodontic origin is 600 mg as a loading dose
followed by 300 mg every 6 hours, whereas in children, this
dose must be adjusted to 10-30mg/Kg (dose/ body weight)
divided into 4 equal doses.
Similar to other antibiotics used as adjuvants in endodontic
therapy, there is no agreement on the duration of the
treatment and the perceived therapeutic benefit. Also,
prolonged use of this antibiotic will increase the likelihood of
untoward effects and selection of resistant bacterial strains.
Despite its excellent pharmacokinetics and moderate
effectiveness against endodontic pathogens, its use can be
associated with significant side effects. Gastrointestinal
disturbances are the most common side effect with an
approximately eight-fold increased risk of developing C.
difficile infection than the use of penicillin (45) that can evolve
into pseudomembranous colitis, a potentially fatal disease.
Thus, administration of this drug must be discontinued
upon the first signs of this disease (i.e. diarrhea with fever,
abdominal pain, mucus and blood in the stool) and the patient
referred to a primary care physician for treatment that may
involve prescription of metronidazole orally or intravenously.
Caution should be employed when prescribing this
medication for patients with history of clindamycin-associated
pseudomembranous colitis (46). Thus, patients with a history
of penicillin allergy and severe gastrointestinal reactions to
clindamycin require alternative antibiotics such as macrolides,
quinolones or tetracyclines. Unfortunately, endodontic
pathogens have lesser susceptibility to these alternative
antibiotics with increased prevalence of resistant strains (28,
35, 43).
[[PAGE 5]]
AAE Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics in Endodontics | Page 5
Indications for performing culture and sensitivity tests
As noted, antibiotics are prescribed empirically by
practitioners. Occasionally, despite adequate local
debridement and antibiotic coverage, the treatment is
ineffective and the patient’s condition deteriorates. The
patient may have unusual species of virulent bacteria,
multidrug resistant bacteria and/or fungal infection. He/
she may also have immune deficiency, uncontrolled diabetes,
penicillin allergy and/or a history of C. difficile infection. In
these situations, culture and sensitivity testing may assist
the practitioner in selecting the appropriate antibiotic. It
is generally recognized, however, that most oral bacterial
species are commensal organisms, that about half of them
are not cultivable, and that the effectiveness of antibiotics is
variable in polymicrobial infections. Therefore, this testing
may only provide additional guidance to the practitioner, in
conjunction with surgical debridement.
Signs and Symptoms Possible Condition Management
Strategies
Continued pain and/or
swelling
Bacterial resistance to
antibiotic or presence
in inaccessible areas
Supplementing
antibiotic regimen with
another oral drug such
as Metronidazole
Trismus, dyspnea and
dysphagia
Spread to poorly
vascularized fascial
spaces such as
submandibular,
sublingual, masseteric,
parapharyngeal and
retropharyngeal spaces
Hospitalization,
culture and sensitivity,
together with IV
antibiotics
Vision problems,
headache
Cavernous sinus
involvement
Hospitalization,
culture and sensitivity,
together with IV
antibiotics
Fever over 102°F,
malaise, lethargy and
increased erythrocyte
sedimentation rate
Massive systemic
involvement, potential
septic shock
Hospitalization,
culture and sensitivity,
together with IV
antibiotics
Table: Unfavorable response to empirically prescribed
antibiotics following root canal debridement, and incision for
drainage.
Aspiration of a purulent fluid is the optimal sampling
method, and is achieved using a 16 or 18-gauge needle.
This is taken promptly to the microbiological laboratory to
promote growth of strict anaerobes (47). The use of swabs
to sample more superficial infections is less effective, due
to the possibility of contamination or death of anaerobes.
Optimally, these swabs should be promptly stored in pre-
reduced transport media, such as Liquid Dental Transport
Medium (Anaerobe Systems, Morgan Hill, CA). Culture and
sensitivity testing is a slow process, which typically takes
three to six days. Due to the urgency of the situation, deeper
drainage and debridement may be indicated, and the patient
is started on other antibiotics or multiple drugs, until the
test results are obtained.
Studies show that beta-lactam antibiotics are the optimal
drugs for endodontic pathogens, and that there is very
little bacterial resistance to amoxicillin with clavulanic acid
(25, 35, 36, 48). These studies have demonstrated more
resistance to clindamycin, which has typically been the
drug of choice for penicillin-allergic patients. Therefore, in
penicillin-allergic patients, other drugs such as moxifloxacin
or azithromycin should be considered (49, 50).
Prophylactic use of antibiotics for endodontic surgery
Prophylactic use of antibiotics to prevent postoperative
infections is common in general and oral surgery. Factors
involved in the decision of whether to prescribe prophylactic
antibiotics, and whether to provide one preoperative dose
or a prolonged course, include the type and site of surgery,
the morbidity associated with potential infection, and the
systemic health of the patient. One randomized clinical
trial compared giving 256 patients undergoing endodontic
surgery either preoperative 600 mg tablet of clindamycin
or placebo (51). The results were that four patients in the
placebo group and two in the clindamycin group developed
postoperative infection, and this difference was not
statistically significant. However, the average surgical time
in this study was only about 30 minutes in both groups,
and the overall number of infections was low. There are no
data available for endodontic surgery that may take a longer
period or are performed in practices that have higher rates
of postoperative infections.
[[PAGE 6]]
Access additional resources at www.aae.org
Nevertheless, there is evidence that antibiotic prophylaxis
may reduce postoperative infection following exodontia
and surgical osteotomy extraction (52, 53). In addition,
there is one study that showed that peri-operative
antibiotic prophylaxis significantly reduced the incidence of
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw, in multiple
myeloma patients on IV bisphosphonates undergoing dental
surgery (54).
In cases where the biopsy result indicates periapical
actinomycosis infection, it does not appear that antibiotic
treatment is indicated, as the surgical procedure is
associated with curettage of the infected tissues in these
cases (55).
Association between adjunctive antibiotics and periapical
healing
The effect of perioperative antibiotics on long term healing
of nonsurgical and surgical endodontics has not been
sufficiently studied. One study compared the healing
of apical periodontitis in 62 patients who underwent
nonsurgical root canal treatment (56). There was no
difference between the penicillin and the control groups
in healing. A more recent endodontic prospective cohort
study showed no association between the use of long-
term antibiotics and nonsurgical treatment or retreatment
outcome (57).
REFERENCES
1. Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, Beldavs ZG, Dumyati GK,
Dunn JR, et al. Burden of Clostridium difficile infection in
the United States. N Engl J Med 2015;372:825-34.
2. Leffler DA, Lamont JT. Clostridium difficile infection. N
Engl J Med 2015;372:1539-48.
3. Dellit TH, Owens RC, McGowan JE, Jr., Gerding DN,
Weinstein RA, Burke JP, et al. Infectious Diseases Society
of America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology
of America guidelines for developing an institutional
program to enhance antimicrobial stewardship. Clin
Infect Dis 2007;44:159-77.
4. Fridkin SK, Cleveland AA, See I, Lynfield R. Emerging
Infections Program as Surveillance for Antimicrobial
Drug Resistance. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21:1578-81.
5. Cope A, Francis N, Wood F, Mann MK, Chestnutt IG.
Systemic antibiotics for symptomatic apical periodontitis
and acute apical abscess in adults. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2014;6:CD010136.
6. Fouad AF, Rivera EM, Walton RE. Penicillin as a
supplement in resolving the localized acute apical
abscess. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod 1996;81:590-5.
7. Henry M, Reader A, Beck M. Effect of penicillin
on postoperative endodontic pain and swelling in
symptomatic necrotic teeth. J Endod 2001;27:117-23.
8. Matthews DC, Sutherland S, Basrani B. Emergency
management of acute apical abscesses in the permanent
dentition: a systematic review of the literature. J Can
Dent Assoc 2003;69:660.
9. Walton RE, Chiappinelli J. Prophylactic penicillin:
effect on posttreatment symptoms following root canal
treatment of asymptomatic periapical pathosis. J Endod
1993;19:466-70.
10. Nagle D, Reader A, Beck M, Weaver J. Effect of systemic
penicillin on pain in untreated irreversible pulpitis.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
2000;90:636-40.
11. Pickenpaugh L, Reader A, Beck M, Meyers WJ, Peterson
LJ. Effect of prophylactic amoxicillin on endodontic flare-
up in asymptomatic, necrotic teeth. J Endod 2001;27:53-
6.
12. Abbott AA, Koren LZ, Morse DR, Sinai IH, Doo RS, Furst
ML. A prospective randomized trial on efficacy of
antibiotic prophylaxis in asymptomatic teeth with pulpal
necrosis and associated periapical pathosis. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 1988;66:722-33.
13. Fouad AF. Are antibiotics effective for endodontic use?
an evidence-based review. Endodontic Topics 2002;3:52-
66.
14. Morse DR, Furst ML, Belott RM, Lefkowitz RD, Spritzer
IB, Sideman BH. Infectious flare-ups and serious
sequelae following endodontic treatment: a prospective
randomized trial on efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis in
cases of asymptomatic pulpal-periapical lesions. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1987;64:96-109.
15. Segura-Egea JJ, Velasco-Ortega E, Torres-Lagares D,
Velasco-Ponferrada MC, Monsalve-Guil L, Llamas-
Carreras JM. Pattern of antibiotic prescription in the
management of endodontic infections amongst Spanish
oral surgeons. Int Endod J 2010;43:342-50.
[[PAGE 7]]
AAE Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics in Endodontics | Page 7
16. Yingling NM, Byrne BE, Hartwell GR. Antibiotic use by
members of the American Association of Endodontists
in the year 2000: report of a national survey. J Endod
2002;28:396-404.
17. Tilburt JC, Emanuel EJ, Kaptchuk TJ, Curlin FA, Miller
FG. Prescribing “placebo treatments”: results of national
survey of US internists and rheumatologists. BMJ
2008;337:a1938.
18. Konig C, Simmen HP, Blaser J. Bacterial concentrations
in pus and infected peritoneal fluid--implications
for bactericidal activity of antibiotics. J Antimicrob
Chemother 1998;42:227-32.
19. Aminoshariae A, Kulild JC. Evidence-based
recommendations for antibiotic usage to treat
endodontic infections and pain: A systematic review
of randomized controlled trials. J Am Dent Assoc
2016;147:186-91.
20. Segura-Egea JJ, Gould K, Sen BH, Jonasson P, Cotti E,
Mazzoni A, et al. Antibiotics in Endodontics: a review. Int
Endod J 2016.
21. Mainjot A, D’Hoore W, Vanheusden A, Van
Nieuwenhuysen JP. Antibiotic prescribing in dental
practice in Belgium. Int Endod J 2009;42:1112-7.
22. Rodriguez-Nunez A, Cisneros-Cabello R, Velasco-Ortega
E, Llamas-Carreras JM, Torres-Lagares D, Segura-Egea JJ.
Antibiotic use by members of the Spanish Endodontic
Society. J Endod 2009;35:1198-203.
23. Wright AJ. The penicillins. Mayo Clin Proc 1999;74:290-
307.
24. Pinheiro ET, Gomes BP, Ferraz CC, Teixeira FB, Zaia AA,
Souza Filho FJ. Evaluation of root canal microorganisms
isolated from teeth with endodontic failure and their
antimicrobial susceptibility. Oral Microbiol Immunol
2003;18:100-3.
25. Baumgartner JC, Xia T. Antibiotic susceptibility of
bacteria associated with endodontic abscesses. J Endod
2003;29:44-7.
26. Khemaleelakul S, Baumgartner JC, Pruksakorn S.
Identification of bacteria in acute endodontic infections
and their antimicrobial susceptibility. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2002;94:746-55.
27. Barr WH, Zola EM, Candler EL, Hwang SM, Tendolkar
AV, Shamburek R, et al. Differential absorption of
amoxicillin from the human small and large intestine.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 1994;56:279-85.
28. Fouad AF. Systemic Antibiotics in Endodontic Infections.
In: Fouad AF, editor. Endodontic Microbiology. Second
ed.: Wiley-Blackwell; 2017: 269-85.
29. Palmer N, Martin M. An investigation of antibiotic
prescribing by general dental practitioners: a pilot study.
Prim Dent Care 1998;5:11-4.
30. Lewis MA, McGowan DA, MacFarlane TW. Short-course
high-dosage amoxycillin in the treatment of acute dento-
alveolar abscess. Br Dent J 1986;161:299-302.
31. Martin MV, Longman LP, Hill JB, Hardy P. Acute
dentoalveolar infections: an investigation of the duration
of antibiotic therapy. Br Dent J 1997;183:135-7.
32. Lacey RW, Lord VL, Howson GL, Luxton DE, Trotter
IS. Double-blind study to compare the selection of
antibiotic resistance by amoxicillin or cephradine in the
commensal flora. Lancet 1983;2:529-32.
33. Kim MK, Chuang SK, August M. Antibiotic Resistance in
Severe Orofacial Infections. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2016.
34. Nikaido H. Antibiotic resistance caused by gram-negative
multidrug efflux pumps. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27 Suppl
1:S32-41.
35. Jungermann GB, Burns K, Nandakumar R, Tolba
M, Venezia RA, Fouad AF. Antibiotic resistance in
primary and persistent endodontic infections. J Endod
2011;37:1337-44.
36. Poeschl PW, Crepaz V, Russmueller G, Seemann R,
Hirschl AM, Ewers R. Endodontic pathogens causing
deep neck space infections: clinical impact of different
sampling techniques and antibiotic susceptibility. J
Endod 2011;37:1201-5.
37. Salvo F, Polimeni G, Moretti U, Conforti A, Leone R, Leoni
O, et al. Adverse drug reactions related to amoxicillin
alone and in association with clavulanic acid: data from
spontaneous reporting in Italy. J Antimicrob Chemother
2007;60:121-6.
38. Macy E. Penicillin and beta-lactam allergy: epidemiology
and diagnosis. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2014;14:476.
[[PAGE 8]]
Access additional resources at www.aae.org
39. Delafuente JC, Panush RS, Caldwell JR. Penicillin and
cephalosporin immunogenicity in man. Ann Allergy
1979;43:337-40.
40. Sanz ML, Garcia BE, Prieto I, Tabar A, Oehling A. Specific
IgE determination in the diagnosis of beta-lactam
allergy. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 1996;6:89-93.
41. Albin S, Agarwal S. Prevalence and characteristics of
reported penicillin allergy in an urban outpatient adult
population. Allergy Asthma Proc 2014;35:489-94.
42. Reusser F. Effect of lincomycin and clindamycin on
peptide chain initiation. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1975;7:32-7.
43. Skucaite N, Peciuliene V, Vitkauskiene A, Machiulskiene
V. Susceptibility of endodontic pathogens to antibiotics
in patients with symptomatic apical periodontitis. J
Endod 2010;36:1611-6.
44. Nicholas P, Meyers BR, Levy RN, Hirschman SZ.
Concentration of clindamycin in human bone.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1975;8:220-1.
45. Brown KA, Khanafer N, Daneman N, Fisman DN. Meta-
analysis of antibiotics and the risk of community-
associated Clostridium difficile infection. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2013;57:2326-32.
46. Buffie CG, Jarchum I, Equinda M, Lipuma L, Gobourne
A, Viale A, et al. Profound alterations of intestinal
microbiota following a single dose of clindamycin results
in sustained susceptibility to Clostridium difficile-
induced colitis. Infect Immun 2012;80:62-73.
47. Poeschl PW, Spusta L, Russmueller G, Seemann R,
Hirschl A, Poeschl E, et al. Antibiotic susceptibility and
resistance of the odontogenic microbiological spectrum
and its clinical impact on severe deep space head and
neck infections. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 2010;110:151-6.
48. Montagner F, Castilho Jacinto R, Correa Signoretti FG,
Scheffer de Mattos V, Grecca FS, Gomes BP. Beta-lactamic
resistance profiles in Porphyromonas, Prevotella, and
Parvimonas species isolated from acute endodontic
infections. J Endod 2014;40:339-44.
49. Cachovan G, Boger RH, Giersdorf I, Hallier O, Streichert
T, Haddad M, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety
of moxifloxacin and clindamycin in the treatment of
odontogenic abscesses and inflammatory infiltrates:
a phase II, double-blind, randomized trial. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2011;55:1142-7.
50. Adriaenssen CF. Comparison of the efficacy, safety and
tolerability of azithromycin and co-amoxiclav in the
treatment of acute periapical abscesses. Journal of
International Medical Research 1998;26:257-65.
51. Lindeboom JA, Frenken JW, Valkenburg P, van den Akker
HP. The role of preoperative prophylactic antibiotic
administration in periapical endodontic surgery:
a randomized, prospective double-blind placebo-
controlled study. Int Endod J 2005;38:877-81.
52. Moreno-Drada JA, Garcia-Perdomo HA. Effectiveness of
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Preventing the Spread of
Infection as a Result of Oral Procedures: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. J Oral Maxillofac Surg
2016;74:1313-21.
53. Marcussen KB, Laulund AS, Jorgensen HL, Pinholt EM. A
Systematic Review on Effect of Single-Dose Preoperative
Antibiotics at Surgical Osteotomy Extraction of Lower
Third Molars. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2016;74:693-703.
54. Montefusco V, Gay F, Spina F, Miceli R, Maniezzo M,
Teresa Ambrosini M, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis
before dental procedures may reduce the incidence
of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with multiple
myeloma treated with bisphosphonates. Leuk
Lymphoma 2008;49:2156-62.
55. Rush JR, Sulte HR, Cohen DM, Makkawy H. Course of
infection and case outcome in individuals diagnosed
with microbial colonies morphologically consistent with
Actinomyces species. J Endod 2002;28:613-8.
56. Ranta H, Haapasalo M, Ranta K, Kontiainen S, Kerosuo
E, Valtonen V, et al. Bacteriology of odontogenic apical
periodontitis and effect of penicillin treatment. Scand J
Infect Dis 1988;20:187-92.
57. Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. A prospective study of
the factors affecting outcomes of nonsurgical root
canal treatment: part 1: periapical health. Int Endod J
2011;44:583-609.
