[[PAGE 1]]
Page 1White Paper
AAE White Paper – Treatment Standards
Introduction
Endodontics is the branch of dentistry that is
concerned with the morphology, physiology
and pathology of the human dental pulp and
periradicular tissues. Its study and practice
encompass the basic clinical sciences including
biology of the normal pulp, and etiology,
diagnosis, prevention and treatment of
diseases and injuries of the pulp and associated
periradicular tissues as defined by The American
Dental Association and American Association of
Endodontists.
The American Association of Endodontists serves
as a trusted and credible source for information
on diagnosis of pulp and periapical pathosis,
treatment planning, urgent/emergent treatment,
vital pulp therapy, nonsurgical root canal
treatment, surgical endodontics, regenerative
endodontic procedures, and outcome assessment.
Treatment by the general dentist is expected to
meet minimum standards as set out in guidelines.
The American Association of Endodontists
has developed and published as “Standards of
Practice”. These guidelines were developed to
assist educational institutions and organized
dentistry in developing minimum educational
requirements and practice standards in
endodontic treatment.
The primary objective of endodontic treatment
is to prevent and intercept pulpal/periradicular
pathosis and to preserve the natural dentition
when affected by pathosis. The practice model in
the United States is predicated on general dentists
having the basic knowledge and experience
regarding endodontic treatment to perform the
majority of nonsurgical root canal procedures on
uncomplicated permanent teeth.
Treatment Standards
Despite similar predoctoral educational curricula,
disparities exist in the levels of knowledge,
competency and skill, and clinical experiences of
general dentists. Over the past two decades there
have been significant advances in technology,
materials and endodontic treatment procedures.
These include but are not limited to microscopy,
rotary Ni-Ti files, ultrasonics, enhanced irrigation
solutions and technologies, digital radiography,
CBCT three dimensional imaging, bioceramics, etc.
These changes have created a disparity in the
quality of care provided by specialists versus
general dentists on teeth with complicated
anatomy and morphology.
The effect of these developments on the Standard
of Care remains unknown. Currently general
dentists perform approximately 75% of all
nonsurgical endodontic procedures. While
endodontists perform only 25% of the total root
canal procedures, they treat 62% of the molars.
With generalists performing the majority of
the uncomplicated anteriors and premolars it
appears that the predoctoral educational process
and procedures in general practice should be
concentrated on uncomplicated permanent teeth
with specialists treating the more complicated
molars.
Treatment is based on a thorough understanding
and interpretation of all diagnostic information
including patient history, clinical and
radiographic examination. Following the
establishment of a diagnosis, treatment planning
should consider the following patient modifiers:
the strategic importance of the tooth/teeth
being treated, the periodontal status, structural
integrity and restorability of the tooth, the long
term prognosis for success, and patient factors
such as the medical status, attitude and desires,
motivation, anxiety, jaw opening, the gag reflex,
disease state, and financial resources.
[[PAGE 2]]
White PaperPage 2AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
The scope of endodontics in general dentistry
includes:
• Differential diagnosis and treatment of pain
and/ or swelling of pulpal and/or periradicular
origin
• Urgent/emergent treatment of pain and/or
swelling to include the pharmacologic use of
antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents, analgesic
drugs and incision for drainage of localized
abscesses
• Urgent/emergent management of traumatic
injuries to the dentoalveolar structures
• Vital pulp treatment to include step-wise caries
excavation, indirect and direct pulp capping,
and pulpotomy procedure
• Non-surgical root canal treatment for the
permanent dentition
• Bleaching of discolored dentin and enamel of
teeth
• Treatment procedures such as post and/or cores
involving the root canal space
Standard of Practice
General dentists should provide endodontic
treatment consistent with contemporary
endodontic standards, their knowledge and
clinical experience, and technical skills. The
standards of practice are constantly changing
based on new evidence and technology. It is
the responsibility of all practitioners to be life-
long learners, in order to meet contemporary
standards.
Self-evaluation is a critical component of life-
long learning. The generalist should be able
to critically evaluate their own competency as
diagnosticians and clinicians and identify areas
that require additional educational experiences.
Based on this evaluation each practitioner
must be able to determine their own skill and
learning in order to determine when the patient
should be referred to the appropriate specialist
for consultation/treatment.
Methods of traditional education and the
emphasis on facts are changing. Information
technology has transformed the dental profession
and placed emphasis on the evidence based
practice model. Contemporary methods of
education emphasizing problem solving and
critical thinking skills employ and stress
professional interactions and the benefits of
multidiscipline and interdisciplinary care.
AAE Case Difficulty
Assessment Form
Following examination and testing, a diagnosis is
established, a treatment plan is formulated, and
the prognosis determined. The general dentist
then must determine the degree of difficulty
and associated risks. The AAE Case Difficulty
Assessment Form provides a national protocol for
accomplishing this assessment.
There are many factors that influence degrees of
difficulty and risk of endodontic treatment.
Recognition of these factors prior to the initiation
of treatment helps practitioners to understand the
complexities that may be involved in individual
cases and prevents adverse outcomes due to
avoidable procedural errors.
In determining the degree of difficulty, a general
dentist should not undertake treatment of a
case unless he/she is prepared to also manage
complications that may arise in treatment.
[[PAGE 3]]
White PaperPage 3AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Guidelines for Using the AAE Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form
The AAE designed the Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form for use in endodontic curricula. The Assessment Form makes case
selection more efficient, more consistent and easier to document. Dentists may also choose to use the Assessment Form to help with referral
decision making and record keeping.
Conditions listed in this form should be considered potential risk factors that may complicate treatment and adversely affect the outcome.
Levels of difficulty are sets of conditions that may not be controllable by the dentist. Risk factors can influence the ability to provide care at a
consistently predictable level and impact the appropriate provision of care and quality assurance.
The Assessment Form enables a practitioner to assign a level of difficulty to a particular case.
Levels of Difficulty
MINIMAL DIFFICULTY: Preoperative condition indicates routine complexity (uncomplicated). These types of cases would exhibit only
those factors listed in the MINIMAL DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a predictable treatment outcome should be attainable by a competent
practitioner with limited experience.
MODERATE DIFFICULTY: Preoperative condition is complicated, exhibiting one or more patient or treatment factors listed in the
MODERATE DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a predictable treatment outcome will be challenging for a competent, experienced practitioner.
HIGH DIFFICULTY: Preoperative condition is exceptionally complicated, exhibiting several factors listed in the MODERATE DIFFICULTY
category or at least one in the HIGH DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a predictable treatment outcome will be challenging for even the most
experienced practitioner with an extensive history of favorable outcomes.
Review your assessment of each case to determine the level of difficulty. If the level of difficulty exceeds your experience and comfort, you
might consider referral to an endodontist.
Patient Information
Full Name
Street Address Suite/Apt
City State/Country Zip
Phone
Email
Disposition
Treat in Office: Yes No
Refer Patient to:
Date
The contribution of the Canadian Academy of Endodontics and others to the development of this form is gratefully acknowledged. The AAE Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form
is designed to aid the practitioner in determining appropriate case disposition. The American Association of Endodontists neither expressly nor implicitly warrants any positive results
associated with the use of this form. This form may be reproduced but may not be amended or altered in any way. © American Association of Endodontists, 180 N. Stetson Ave., Suite 1500,
Chicago, IL 60601; Phone: 800-872-3636 or 312-266-7255; Fax: 866-451-9020 or 312-266-9867; E-mail: info@aae.org; Website: aae.org
Criteria and Subcriteria MINIMAL DIFFICULTY MODERATE DIFFICULTY HIGH DIFFICULTY
A. PATIENT CONSIDERATIONS
MEDICAL HISTORY No medical problem (ASA Class 1*) One or more medical problem
(ASA Class 2*)
Complex medical history/serious illness/
disability (ASA Classes 3-5*)
ANESTHESIA No history of anesthesia problems Vasoconstrictor intolerance Difficulty achieving anesthesia
PATIENT DISPOSITION Cooperative and compliant Anxious but cooperative Uncooperative
ABILITY TO OPEN MOUTH No limitation Slight limitation in opening Significant limitation in opening
GAG REFLEX None Gags occasionally with
radiographs/treatment
Extreme gag reflex which has
compromised past dental care
EMERGENCY CONDITION Minimum pain or swelling Moderate pain or swelling Severe pain or swelling
Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form and Guidelines
[[PAGE 4]]
White PaperPage 4AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
B. DIAGNOSTIC AND TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS
DIAGNOSIS Signs and symptoms consistent with
recognized pulpal and periapical
conditions
Extensive differential diagnosis of
usual signs and symptoms required
Confusing and complex signs and
symptoms: difficult diagnosis
History of chronic oral/facial pain
RADIOGRAPHIC
DIFFICULTIES
Minimal difficulty obtaining/
interpreting radiographs
Moderate difficulty obtaining/
interpreting radiographs (e.g., high
floor of mouth, narrow or low
palatal vault, presence of tori)
Extreme difficulty obtaining/interpreting
radiographs (e.g., superimposed anatomical
structures)
POSITION IN THE ARCH Anterior/premolar
Slight inclination (<10°)
Slight rotation (<10°)
1st molar
Moderate inclination (10-30°)
Moderate rotation (10-30°)
2nd or 3rd molar
Extreme inclination (>30°)
Extreme rotation (>30°)
TOOTH ISOLATION Routine rubber dam placement Simple pretreatment modification
required for rubber dam isolation
Extensive pretreatment modification
required for rubber dam isolation
CROWN MORPHOLOGY Normal original crown morphology Full coverage restoration
Porcelain restoration
Bridge abutment
Moderate deviation from normal
tooth/root form (e.g., taurodontism
microdens)
Teeth with extensive coronal
destruction
Restoration does not reflect original
anatomy/alignment
Significant deviation from normal tooth/
root form (e.g., fusion dens in dente)
CANAL AND ROOT
MORPHOLOGY
Slight or no curvature (<10°)
Closed apex (<1 mm in diameter)
Moderate curvature (10-30°)
Crown axis differs moderatel from
root axis. Apical opening 1-1.5 mm
in diameter
Extreme curvature (>30°) or S-shaped curve
Mandibular premolar or anterior with 2
roots
Maxillary premolar with 3 roots
Canal divides in the middle or apical third
Very long tooth (>25 mm)
Open apex (>1.5 mm in diameter)
RADIOGRAPHIC
APPEARANCE OF CANAL(S)
Canal(s) visible and not reduced
in size
Canal(s) and chamber visible but
reduced in size
Pulp stones
Indistinct canal path
Canal(s) not visible
RESORPTION No resorption evident Minimal apical resorption Extensive apical resorption
Internal resorption
External resorption
C. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
TRAUMA HISTORY Uncomplicated crown fracture of
mature or immature teeth
Complicated crown fracture of
mature teeth
Subluxation
Complicated crown fracture of immature
teeth
Horizontal root fracture
Alveolar fracture
Intrusive, extrusive or lateral luxation
Avulsion
ENDODONTIC TREATMENT
HISTORY
No previous treatment Previous access without
complications
Previous access with complications (e.g.,
perforation, non-negotiated canal, ledge,
separated instrument)
Previous surgical or nonsurgical
endodontic treatment completed
PERIODONTAL-ENDODONTIC
CONDITION
None or mild periodontal disease Concurrent moderate periodontal
disease
Concurrent severe periodontal disease
Cracked teeth with periodontal
complications
Combined endodontic/periodontic lesion
Root amputation prior to endodontic
treatment
Criteria and Subcriteria MINIMAL DIFFICULTY MODERATE DIFFICULTY HIGH DIFFICULTY
*American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Classification System
Class 1: No systemic illness. Patient healthy. Class 2: Patient with mild degree of systemic illness, but without functional restrictions, e.g., well-controlled hypertension. Class 3: Patient with
severe degree of systemic illness which limits activities, but does not immobilize the patient. Class 4: Patient with severe systemic illness that immobilizes and is sometimes life threatening.
Class 5: Patient will not survive more than 24 hours whether or not surgical intervention takes place. www.asahq.org/clinical/physicalstatus.htm
[[PAGE 5]]
White PaperPage 5AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Treatment Procedures
A variety of endodontic techniques, materials
and treatment philosophies present a challenge
to dental practitioners, patients, governing bodies
and other interested parties making decisions
about the appropriateness and/or quality of
endodontic care.
Endodontic treatment procedures should be
of such quality that predictable and favorable
results will occur with the understanding that, in
a biologic system, treatment procedures that are
appropriate may not always result in a successful
outcome. Success is dependent on many variables
that may preclude a successful outcome. These
factors include but are not limited to the patient’s
medical and dental condition, patient compliance,
variations in anatomy and morphology, and
complications during the procedures.
When practitioners are presented with
challenges during treatment that risk
procedural errors and poor outcomes,
consultation and referral are always valid
options.
Considerations
General dentists must recognize that pulp and
periradicular pathosis is primarily a microbial
disease. Strict adherence to aseptic procedures to
include the use of the rubber dam is required.
Nonsurgical root canal treatment must employ
materials proven to be biocompatible. For
example, the use of paraformaldehyde containing
sealer/pastes are below the standard of care for
endodontic treatment.
Non-Surgical Endodontics
Uncomplicated Mature Permanent Teeth
Nonsurgical root canal treatment is indicated
primarily in cases of irreversible pulpitis and
when pulp necrosis with and without periapical
pathosis occurs. However, elective root canal
treatment may be considered for restorative
treatment planning and for overdentures or
where teeth need to be preserved over extraction
in patients who are receiving systemic treatments
including head and neck radiation treatment,
bisphosphonates, chemotherapy, and/or
corticosteroids.
Endodontic treatment involves chemo-
mechanical preparation of the root canal system
to eliminate organic, inorganic and bacterial
products and sealing of the radicular space with
a biocompatible material (obturation). Root
canal sealers are used in conjunction with the
core filling material to establish an adequate
three dimensional seal and induce hard tissue
formation in healing outcomes.
Root Canal Disinfection
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist should
be able to safely and effectively utilize standard
disinfection protocols in the irrigation and
medication of root canal spaces.
The primary etiologic agents of apical
periodontitis are microorganisms and their by-
products that have invaded the pulpal space and
established multispecies biofilm communities in
the root canal system. Biofilms are involved in all
stages of root canal infection and can be found
on root canal walls, in dentinal tubules, and on
extraradicular surfaces.
The clinical management of infected root canals
undergoing non-surgical root canal treatment
involves instrumentation and disinfection.
[[PAGE 6]]
White PaperPage 6AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Instrumentation disrupts biofilms which colonize
infected soft and hard tissues and provides access
for irrigation and exposure to antimicrobial
solutions for disinfection of the root canal system.
Disinfection is achieved by the use of both
antimicrobial agents and the mechanical flushing
action of irrigation, with the goal being the
disruption, displacement and removal of pulpal
remnants, microorganisms, metabolic byproducts,
debris and the smear layer created during
instrumentation. When treatment is provided
over multiple appointments, inter-appointment
intracanal medicaments provide additional
opportunities for disinfection.
The development of irrigation and disinfection
clinical protocols in current use has been based
primarily on the findings reported in classic
studies that used methods of aerobic and
anaerobic culturing of viable microorganisms.
More recent studies using molecular and
advanced imaging techniques have shown
the endodontic microflora to be significantly
more complex than can be shown by culture
methods, and that biofilms and debris can
remain in inaccessible areas of the root canal
system, regardless of clinical techniques used
during treatment. Taken together, these studies
have established that disinfection, rather
than sterilization, of infected root canals is a
reasonable, and achievable, expectation. The
overall goal is to provide an environment that will
enable healing.
Irrigants and Medicaments
The “ideal” irrigant should be an effective
antimicrobial agent and organic tissue solvent,
non-irritating, stable and easily stored. It should
be active in the presence of blood and serum,
non-staining, non-antigenic, non-toxic, have
low surface tension, and be non-destructive to
dentin, apical tissues and endodontic instruments.
Ideally, it should remove the smear layer
and disinfect dentinal tubules. Substantivity
(persistence of effect) may be desirable as long as
residue is not left that could interfere with root
canal obturation.
Irrigants ideally should be convenient and
inexpensive. There is no single solution currently
available that possesses all of the aforementioned
desirable qualities.
Irrigants currently used for endodontic treatment
may be categorized as:
1. Antimicrobial agents [e.g. sodium
hypochlorite (NaOCl), chlorhexidine (CHX)]
The most commonly used antimicrobial
irrigant is NaOCl, an oxidizing agent that
releases chlorine in the form of hypochlorous
acid (HOCl). NaOCl has a dose-dependent
effect on polymicrobial biofilms, with higher
concentrations being more effective. NaOCl
is an excellent organic tissue solvent and can
be used to remove the organic component
of the smear layer. Continuous exchange
of fresh solution and agitation enhances
the tissue dissolution capability of NaOCl. A
major disadvantage of NaOCl is its toxicity,
particularly in the event of extrusion into the
periradicular tissues.
Chlorhexidine is a cationic bisbiguanide with
concentration-dependent antibacterial and
substantivity properties. It is available in both
liquid and gel form. While CHX has a broad
spectrum of antimicrobial activity, it lacks
tissue solvent properties, and is less effective
against biofilms than NaOCl.
2. Demineralizing agents [e.g.
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)]
During instrumentation, dentin
demineralization can be facilitated by the
action of chelating agents such as EDTA
which are capable of forming soluble non-
ionic chelates with metallic ions, such as
calcium found in hydroxyapatite crystals.
Chelating agents assist in the negotiation
and enlargement of severely constricted
or obstructed root canals, as well as the
removal of the inorganic component of
the smear layer immediately prior to root
canal obturation. EDTA is typically used
as a buffered solution, with or without a
surfactant or antiseptic.
[[PAGE 7]]
White PaperPage 7AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
3. Combinations of agents, with or without
detergents, antibiotics, antiseptics and future
directions
The flow of antimicrobial agents can be
enhanced by the addition of surfactants that
decrease surface tension thereby potentially
enabling better penetration and access to
narrower, confined portions of the root canal
system. Solutions with low antimicrobial
activity may be combined with antiseptics
to enhance their usefulness. In the near
future, advanced research with nanoparticles
and energy activation of solutions will bear
witness to endodontic inquiry addressing
future challenges in biofilm tenacity and the
complexity of root canal systems.
Medicaments should be placed as inter-
appointment intracanal dressings if treatment is
completed over multiple visits. Medicaments can
reduce the microbial count of species remaining
in the root canal system, prevent regrowth and
detoxify endotoxin.
Even for the vital tooth undergoing NSRCT over
multiple visits, the placement of intracanal
medicaments can help mitigate the consequences
of inadvertent contamination or unanticipated
leakage of the interim restoration. When used, the
medicament should entirely fill the canal to allow
for optimal efficacy.
Currently, calcium hydroxide is the primary
choice of intracanal medicament. In addition to its
antimicrobial action, the alkaline pH of calcium
hydroxide facilitates dissolution of organic tissues
and bacterial products such as endotoxin. Calcium
hydroxide can be placed as a slurry (powder
mixed with a liquid such as saline or sterile
water) or as a proprietary paste via syringe,
lentulo, or paper point delivery. It should be
noted that CaOH can be highly toxic if expressed
into the neurovasculature tissues so choice of a
delivery method should be based on the clinical
parameters of each case.
It should be noted that no particular antimicrobial
irrigant or medicament can claim to result in
superior healing outcomes. As such, decisions
on which irrigant(s) to employ may be based
on factors such as clinicians’ skill, efficiency of
treatment, case selection and costs incurred.
Irrigation Delivery
The aim of irrigation is to physically disrupt
and debride the root canal. Intracanal irrigation
provides a stream of chemicals to induce
antimicrobial activity, demineralization,
tissue dissolution, lubrication, bleaching and
hemorrhage control. The current or force created
by irrigation carries away debris towards the
orifice; the efficacy of this process is influenced
by factors such as access to surfaces, volume of
solution and solution exchange. Irrigation should
be employed at each instrument change with the
total volume of irrigating solution dependent on
the size, shape and number of canals. Irrigants
should be confined to the root canal space.
Current irrigation delivery techniques can be
categorized as follows:
1. Needle and syringe (“conventional”,
“positive pressure”)
The most common irrigation technique
utilizes needle and syringe delivery.
Effectiveness is dependent on the depth
of insertion of the needle and is improved
with increased apical size and taper of the
root canal. Needle gauge should be based on
case selection and canal size. Canals need
to be enlarged sufficiently for the needle to
be placed loosely in the canal to the desired
depth. This will depend on factors including
root length, curvature and apical anatomy.
Clinicians must avoid placing excessive
pressure on the syringe during irrigation and
ensure that the needle is not bound in the
canal nor inserted too deeply into the canal of
a tooth with a wide-open apex.
Slow injection using side-venting needles
and constant movement in small, vertical
amplitudes can help prevent hydrostatic
buildup.
[[PAGE 8]]
White PaperPage 8AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
2. Negative pressure
The rationale behind negative pressure
irrigation delivery is to reverse the direction
of irrigant flow away from the apex thereby
minimizing the risk of apical extrusion of
irrigant compared to other approaches.
3. Energy activated devices used alone or as
supplementary methods
Activation systems (sonic and ultrasonic)
aim to enhance the movement of irrigant
solutions within the confines of the root canal
space in order to disrupt biofilms and debris,
and facilitate their removal.
No particular irrigation delivery technique
can claim to induce superior healing success.
Decisions on which system to employ may
be based on factors such as clinicians’ skill,
efficiency of treatment, case selection and
costs incurred.
Essential considerations with the usage of
NaOCl as an irrigant
1. In the event that NaOCl is extruded into
the periradicular tissues, the patient
may experience immediate severe pain,
bleeding, ecchymosis and, potentially, long-
term paresthesia. If a predisposing risk for
irrigant extrusion into the periradicular
tissues is suspected, such as open apices,
root perforation or vertical root fracture,
clinicians should proceed with caution, or
consider using another irrigant solution.
2. The higher the concentration of NaOCl,
the greater its antimicrobial activity, but
also the greater its toxicity and potential
adverse effect on biomechanical properties
of dentin. If clinicians prefer to use lower
concentrations, antimicrobial activity can
be facilitated by using higher volumes and
increasing the frequency of irrigation.
3. The majority of information on the clinical
usage of NaOCl has been obtained on
concentrations of between 0.5% to ~6%; the
efficacy and toxicity associated with higher
concentrations is not known.
Final considerations in root canal disinfection
1. The use of rubber dam is mandatory to avoid
microbial contamination of the root canal
system during treatment, to retract tissues
and protect the patient, prevent aspiration or
swallowing of instruments, and limit aerosols.
2. While many current concepts about root
canal irrigation and irrigants evolved in
earlier times, the fundamental goals of
disinfection, tissue-debridement, lavage and
lubrication remain unchanged.
3. The majority of clinical studies have
used NaOCl as an irrigant delivered via
conventional irrigation techniques that
flushed the canal without the application of
energy; these studies have formed the basis
for treatment outcome estimations.
4. The best approach to controlling microbes
during endodontic treatment is the use of
aseptic technique, effective debridement,
local antimicrobials, systemic antibiotics only
if indicated, and optimal apical and coronal
seal.
[[PAGE 9]]
White PaperPage 9AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Competence in Access
Preparation and
Instrumentation of
Root Canal Systems
Access Cavity Preparation
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist should
be able to predictably access the pulp chamber for
the purpose of performing root canal treatment by
locating all main canal orifices.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist
when accessing a pulp chamber should be able to
minimize excessive removal of tooth structure,
structural damage to the treated tooth, including
prevention of perforations.
Purpose of Accessing the Pulp Chamber
All intracanal procedures require a preparation
through the coronal structure in a prescribed
location and opening of the pulp space. The
ultimate goal of this step is to expose the pulp
chamber and radicular space for subsequent
instrumentation, irrigation, debridement and
antimicrobial treatment. Therefore, it is essential
that all canal orifices are identified and rendered
accessible.
Following treatment, all root canal-treated teeth
must receive a definitive restoration to protect the
remaining tooth structure and promote longevity
and function. To fulfill this objective, it is essential
that the coronal access opening be provided with
the least damage to dental structures.
Information Gathering Prior to Access
In order to prepare an access cavity
appropriately, that is in the correct orientation
and location, preoperative knowledge of the tooth
anatomy and morphology must be considered
by the clinician regarding the number and
location of canal orifices, and the incidence and
configuration of anatomical variations within any
given tooth.
Towards this goal, well-angulated preoperative
radiographic images are mandatory to facilitate
a safe and efficient access; negotiation of the
root canal system; and to minimize the risk
of procedural errors that may result from
unexpected anatomical complexity or an
inappropriate orientation. Periapical films and
bite-wings (for posterior teeth) provide an initial
direction and alignment of pulp chamber and
root canal position. Although two radiographs
with different angulations are often sufficient
to develop a 3D image of the tooth to be treated,
cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) images
may be justified and necessary to evaluate the
existence of extra canals, complex morphologies,
curvatures and/or dental developmental
anomalies.
Images should be studied carefully, and coronal
access aided by enhanced magnification and
lighting in complicated cases is warranted and
appropriate. Currently, the use of the dental
operating microscope is the highest achievable
level of lighting and magnification and is justified
when pulpal complexity and natural deposition
of mineral reduces prognosis and affect a
successful outcome. Cases with anatomical and
morphologic complexity and potential clinical
challenges beyond a practitioner’s skill level
should be referred to a colleague with specialty
skills in endodontics.
Performing the Access Preparation
For optimal aseptic conditions, a rubber dam
must be in place before commencing access
cavity preparation. There are rare but occasional
clinical situations in tooth alignment or rotation,
particularly where treatment is undertaken
by inexperienced clinicians, when accessing
before rubber dam isolation for cleaning and
disinfection may have benefits; however, the
rubber dam must be applied prior to introducing
endodontic instruments and canal preparation.
Standardized access cavity outlines for each tooth
help to mitigate some of the risks involved. These
risks include perforation as well as inappropriate
and excessive tissue loss.
[[PAGE 10]]
White PaperPage 10AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Appropriate access provides a convenience form,
in which the smallest possible dimensions of an
access cavity are dictated by the precise location
of canal entrances on the pulpal floor. The
concept of a so-called straight-line approach to an
orifice and further to the primary curvature of
the root canal is relevant to minimize procedural
errors during subsequent treatment procedures.
A large access with divergent walls is not required
for the use of contemporary flexible and fatigue-
resistant root canal instruments.
Access preparation is more readily achieved with
magnification, enhanced lighting, and appropriate
instruments. Many teeth have suffered
considerable tissue loss prior to endodontic
intervention, and it may be even more important
in such cases to adopt a thoughtful, deliberate,
and conservative approach to access in order
to avoid further unnecessary tissue loss and
structural weakening.
In most generalist practices, practitioners
are encouraged to work as conservatively as
reasonable. Clinical steps include establishing
the appropriate coronal outline form with a
high speed handpiece under water cooling and
penetration into the pulp chamber towards the
largest pulp horn. The outline is then refined,
including unroofing the chamber with a non-
end cutting bur which is unlikely to damage the
chamber floor or walls or by using a slow speed
handpiece. When the dental operating microscope
is available, conventional high- and low-speed
burs may be less desirable, and practitioners
may prefer to selectively unroof the chamber
with specially designed ultrasonically energized
tips that improve visual access, while providing
high cutting efficiency, combined with safety and
control. Specifically designed endodontic burs and
micro-instruments are available to facilitate such
procedures under microscopic magnification and
illumination.
Detrimental Outcomes During Access
A perforation on access, either towards the
furcation in multi-rooted teeth, or towards
the periodontal ligament in other locations,
significantly reduces the outcome of the overall
treatment. However, subtler structure loss is
also associated with reduced prognosis for
long-term retention of root canal treated teeth.
Endodontically treated teeth are more frequently
extracted because of fracture than because of
persistent apical pathosis and efforts to maintain
tooth structure are beneficial.
These contemporary concepts in access
cavity design change the current focus from
coronally divergent preparations to the selective
preservation of dentin, prioritizing the removal
of caries and restorative material ahead of
tooth structure. However, the focus on dentin
preservation should not mean that treatment
goals must be compromised, and access
preparation should not be so restrictive as to
impede the location and entry of instruments
into all canal orifices for safe and efficient
cleaning and shaping procedures. Cavities cut
within restorative materials such as composite or
amalgam can often be slightly larger. Complete
removal of existing restorative materials in their
entirety provides a better coronal seal and allows
a more complete understanding of the remaining
tooth structure and restorability of the tooth
following treatment.
[[PAGE 11]]
White PaperPage 11AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Measuring Competence
Competence in accessing root canal systems is
demonstrated by the following skills:
• Appropriate preoperative evaluation of
anatomy and morphology and the analysis of
the skill level necessary to predictably find and
reveal all canal orifices
• Understanding structural parameters and the
prognosis for adequate ferrule related to dentin
height and width at the restoration interface
• Designing and creating access cavities with
respect to specific internal anatomy and
orientation in the oral cavity of the patient
• Preparing coronal access preparations that
preserve tooth structure, are centered in the
coronal position, are measured for depth and
long axis orientation, permit location and
instrumentation of all canals, and prevent
perforations (lateral and furcal)
Root Canal Preparation
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist
performing root canal preparation should be able
to determine and maintain an appropriate working
length.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist
performing root canal preparation should be
able to prepare a canal to width conducive to
debridement, subsequent antimicrobial treatment,
and obturation.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist
performing root canal preparation should be able
to avoid procedural mishaps, including but not
limited to, damage to major vascular and/or neural
structures, canal transportation, ledge formation,
canal blockage, file fracture, and perforation.
Purpose of the Preparation of Root Canals
Clinical procedures for root canal instrumentation
have two fundamental goals: to preserve the
natural dentition for the lifetime of the patient
(“retention”) and to treat or prevent apical
periodontitis (“healing”). These are not mutually
exclusive goals, and both are important. There
is solid evidence that debriding all canals to
working length demonstrates competence in
treating apical periodontitis while committing
over-preparation errors or filling beyond the
confines of the root canal system impedes success
and significantly reduces prognosis for retention.
The purpose of shaping is to facilitate
debridement, disinfection and to provide space
for the placement of obturation materials.
The main technical objectives of shaping are
to maintain the apical foramen in its original
position, allowing it to remain as small as
possible; and to develop a continuously tapering
funneled preparation from the canal orifice to the
apex allowing the tapered shape to provide apical
resistance form during obturation.
Metrics of Canal Preparation: Apical Width
and Length
Based on studies of apical anatomy, the ideal
apical point of termination, also known as
working length, has been established empirically
to be 0.5 to 1.0mm from the radiographic apex.
Contemporary clinical evidence lists significant
adverse factors that influence success such as the
creation of a ledge or perforation, preoperative
periradicular disease, and incorrect length of the
root canal preparation and subsequent filling
more than 2.0 mm short of the radiographic
apex or obturation materials extruded and not
confined to the canal space.
Traditionally the working length has been
determined with periapical radiographs;
however, it is recommended that an electronic
apex locator is used in conjunction with verifying
radiographs to approximate the location of
the apical constriction and terminate canal
preparation accordingly.
[[PAGE 12]]
White PaperPage 12AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
The decision of where to terminate the
preparation in a specific case will be based on
knowledge of apical anatomy, tactile sensation,
radiographic interpretation, information from
apex locators, the presence of apical bleeding, and
occasionally the patient’s response.
Degree of Apical Enlargement
Generalizations may be made regarding tooth
anatomy and morphology, although each tooth
is unique. Because morphology is variable,
there can be no standardized apical canal size.
Rather, the degree of enlargement is dictated by
the initial canal size, the irrigation regimen and
the obturation technique employed. A sufficient
canal size is currently required for mechanical
debridement and to place antimicrobial solutions
into contact with the root canal system.
However, as dentin is removed from the canal
walls, the root becomes less resistant to fracture
and the risk of preparation errors increases.
For example, narrow thin roots, such as in
mandibular incisors, may not be enlarged to the
same degree as bulkier roots, such as maxillary
central incisors or canines. Likewise, many
canals in multirooted teeth such as mesial
canals in mandibular molars and buccal canals
in maxillary molars are delicate and curved,
limiting canal preparation size. Apical canal
enlargement must not be done at the expense of
coronal dentin, where in molars the radicular
wall thickness towards the furcation is in some
sections, 1.0 mm or less.
Elimination of Etiology
In cases of root canal treatment of teeth with
vital pulp tissue (irreversible pulpitis and elective
treatment procedures), complete removal of the
tissue and creating sufficient space for obturation
materials is the objective. With pulpal necrosis,
root canal walls are typically covered with a
polymicrobial bacterial biofilm, extending into
secondary anatomy such as fins, isthmuses and
accessory canals. A variety of microbial species
can also penetrate deep into dentinal tubules.
The development of nickel-titanium instruments
has dramatically changed the techniques of
cleaning and shaping; these instruments have
been rapidly adopted by clinicians around the
world. The primary advantage to using these
flexible instruments is a significant reduction in
the incidence of preparation errors.
Neither hand instruments nor rotary files have
been shown to completely debride the canal
system. Mechanical enlargement of the canal
space dramatically decreases the presence of
microorganisms present in the canal but cannot
render the canal sterile. Therefore, the use of
antimicrobial irrigants is essential in addition
to mechanical preparation techniques. These
irrigants are delivered by a needle-and-syringe
system and may effectively extend within the
main canal space. However, the presence of
dentin debris in accessory canal spaces and the
complexity of most root canal systems remain
impediments to effective irrigation.
Detrimental Outcomes of Canal Preparation
With ineffective length control, files may
be overextended and directly impact the
periodontal ligament and strategic structures
such as the mental and inferior alveolar nerves,
and maxillary sinus. Likewise, errors in canal
preparation, resulting in canal perforations either
at midroot or in the apical canal third, can lead
to the extrusion of irrigation solutions or filling
material and secondarily damage structures.
Other preparation errors, such as instrument
fracture, as well as canal transportation, ledge
and blockage formation, are impediments to
complete debridement. Instrumentation must
only be performed after proper understanding of
canal complexities and with consideration of the
specific instruments that are used.
[[PAGE 13]]
White PaperPage 13AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Measuring Competence
Demonstrating competence in shaping of root
canals is demonstrated by the following skills:
• Ability to predictably enlarge canal spaces to
mechanically remove vital or necrotic tissues
and microorganisms; provide effective space
for antimicrobial solutions and intracanal
medicaments; and the insertion and
condensation of obturation materials.
• Conscious determination and maintenance of
an exact apical end point and restricting canal
preparation to the confines of the root canal
• Selecting instruments and treatment sequences
that minimize damage to radicular structures
• In-depth understanding of the development of
procedural errors and ways to avoid these
• Patient-oriented decision making when
recognizing procedural errors
Endodontic Obturation
Shaping any root canal system promotes
disinfection and obturation and is the cornerstone
of non-surgical endodontics. All healing outcomes,
both long and short term, center on the technical
quality and attention to detail invested in these
steps.
Most importantly, clinicians should continually
evaluate any treatment step, and the scientific and
clinical evidence supporting the treatment for its
impact on overall outcomes, clinical healing, as
well as the outcome of long-term retention of the
natural dentition over the course of the patient’s
lifetime.
There is solid evidence that debriding all canals
to working length is efficient in treating apical
periodontitis, while committing preparation
errors or filling beyond the confines of the
root canal system is detrimental to this healing
process.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist
must be able utilize obturation techniques and
materials that protect the patient from untoward
outcomes and maximize the potential for healing
and well-being.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist must
demonstrate well prepared and filled root canals
that display a homogenous radiopaque appearance,
free of voids and filled to working length.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist must
protect the patient by avoiding overfill in the
presence of vulnerable structures or neurovascular
anatomy.
Molar endodontics is inherently more difficult
than root canal treatment for central maxillary
incisors for several reasons, notably the more
complex anatomy and the location of the teeth
in the patient’s mouth, among other factors, such
as anesthesia. Any anatomical complexity, no
matter its position in the arch or the tooth where
it is found requires that the successful clinician
will consider the specific patient’s needs and be
competent to manage the unusual or untoward
occurrence.
[[PAGE 14]]
White PaperPage 14AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Essential Considerations in Effective
Obturation
Only a well prepared canal system can provide
ideal conditions for appropriate obturation. A
well-shaped and well-debrided canal system
will potentially create the conditions for healing
periapical tissues. Because a root canal system
is inaccessible to the body’s immune system,
best practice therefore dictates that root canals
should be filled as completely as possible in
all dimensions, in order to prevent ingress of
nutrients or oral microorganisms. None of the
established techniques for root canal filling
provides a definitive coronal, lateral, and apical
seal. For this reason, a permanent coronal
restoration should be placed as soon as feasible
after the endodontic treatment.
Ideally, a root canal filling should seal all
foramina leading to the periodontium; be without
voids; be adapted to the instrumented canal walls,
and end at the apical terminus. The following
considerations will help to provide a fluid-tight
seal of the cleaned and prepared root canal
system in order to protect periradicular tissues
from bacterial recontamination.
There are many clinically acceptable materials
and techniques for root canal filling; the spectrum
of root canal fillings includes:
1. Sealer (cement/paste/resin) only
2. Sealer and a single cone of a stiff or flexible
core material
3. Sealer coating combined with three
dimensional lateral compaction of core
materials
4. Sealer coating combined with three
dimensional warm compaction of core
materials
5. Sealer coating combined with carrier-based
core materials
It is important to recognize that many States in
the USA adhere to the RESPECTABLE MINORITY
RULE: Just because a treating dentist uses
different materials or performs a procedure
differently, it does not make the dentist’s
treatment below the standard of care. However,
paraformaldehyde pastes and holistic dentistry
that advocates and recommends wholesale
extraction of endodontically treated teeth or
removal of all metallic fillings, claiming systemic
harm, are unacceptable and disrespected
minority views.
Studies have shown paste-only techniques are
subject to volume shrinkage during their set. As
such, the material pulls away from the walls as it
sets and the resultant loss of interface adhesion
leaves gaps and/or channel formations between
the dentin wall and the set sealer. Controlling
length and density is difficult and extrusion
is a major risk. With the increased risk of
extrusion, the toxicity of certain sealers such as
paraformaldehyde-containing pastes is a great
concern.
Several of these techniques have shown
comparable success rates regarding apical bone
fill or healing of periradicular lesions, so that a
clinician may choose from a variety of techniques
and approaches that work best for each specific
case and/or clinician.
All of these recommended techniques utilize a
solid core material as well as sealer. The following
lists the main steps in root canal obturation:
1. Choosing a technique for obturation
2. Selection of master cones and/or sealer
strategy
3. Canal drying and sealer application
4. Adapting the cone to the canal and verifying
the position and fit
5. Obturating the apical portion (lateral and
vertical compaction)
6. Completing the obturation process
7. Assessing the quality of the overall obturation
[[PAGE 15]]
White PaperPage 15AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
No particular technique can claim superior
healing success. Decisions on which system
to employ may be based on such factors as
clinicians’ skill, efficiency of treatment, case
selection, simplicity of procedures involved and
costs incurred.
All root canals to be filled should be assessed
before choosing a technique. In the presence of
open apices or procedural errors such as apical
transportation from the original canal position,
and also in teeth with apices in close proximity
to the mandibular canal or the sinus, there is
the potential for overfills and serious injury. In
general, canals should only be filled when the
canal can be dried.
Root fillings should be sterile or disinfected prior
to placement.
Most sealers are toxic in the freshly mixed state,
but this toxicity is reduced after setting. When in
contact with tissues and tissue fluids, zinc oxide
eugenol-based sealers are absorbable while resin
based materials typically are slow to absorb or
are not readily absorbed. Some by-products of
sealers may adversely affect and delay healing.
Therefore, sealers should not be routinely
extruded into the periradicular tissues. Recent
development of bioceramic sealers holds promise
of being biocompatible and tolerant of residual
moisture in the canal.
Cones are available in several tapers with the goal
to fit cones to the best wall contact at working
length, as indicated by the sensation of tug-back,
or resistance to pulling the cone out. If a cone
is too tapered for the preparation, it will make
contact with the canal wall coronally with the fit
being short of length. If it is not tapered enough, it
will be loose, and will appear crimped at the tip. A
good primary fit with apical tug-back of a master
cone is one adjusted to fit both the apical size and
the taper of the preparation. This is critical to
promote a good obturation.
Prepared and filled canals should demonstrate
a homogenous radiopaque appearance, free
of voids and importantly filled to working
length. The fill should approximate canal walls
and extend as much as possible into canal
irregularities such as an isthmus, ribbon-
shaped spaces or a C-shaped canal system.
The fill of accessory canals is not predictable
and not a prerequisite for success. In order to
avoid overextension of root filling material
into the periapical tissue, and specifically in
the mandibular canal or maxillary sinus, it is
recommended to accurately determine working
length to prevent destruction of the apical
constriction.
For infected root canal systems, the best healing
results are achieved when the working length
is between 0.5 to 1.0 mm from the tip of the
root as visible on a radiograph. In posterior
endodontics, determination of apical canal
anatomy is often difficult. It may be appropriate
when treating second mandibular molars that
are in close proximity to the mandibular canal
to de-emphasize patency and even block apical
foramina to avoid large overfills. Large overfills
may be an impediment to healing and in the
worst case may be associated with nerve damage
and permanent patient injury (paresthesia and
dysesthesia).
Additional Important Obturation
Considerations
Thermoplastic obturation using heat-softened
gutta-percha can fill accessory canals and
communications, promoting movement of
softened gutta-percha into lateral canals, and
isthmuses. This allows for the filling of canals
with a higher volume of core material. On the
other hand, it can also result in material extrusion
into the periapical area because of the enhanced
flow characteristics, especially in cases where
the apical foramen has inadvertently been over
instrumented. Confining the root filling to the
canal space has predictably shown higher success
rates. The responsibility to avoid overfills
in the presence of vulnerable structures or
neurovascular anatomy is the responsibility of
the clinician. There is no acceptable defense for
any operator when a patient’s health and well-
being is harmed by a lack of clinician diligence.
[[PAGE 16]]
White PaperPage 16AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Cautions In Obturation Safety
An “injection only” technique is not
recommended in medication placement or
obturation because of the danger of overfill; if
the operator chooses this option, the apical fill
of 3-4 millimeters should always be verified by
radiograph for placement and density before
proceeding with the rest of the fill.
Carrier based systems create an apically directed
hydraulic pressure during application to the
canal. While these systems create a dense filling,
care must be taken to:
1. Not use large amounts of sealer.
2. Insert the carrier slowly.
3. Verify working length to avoid overfilling.
Avoid Overfilling: Gross overextension of
obturation materials usually indicates faulty
technique.
1. When selecting a filling technique it is
important to consider adjacent anatomical
structures and the patency (level) of the root
canal. There are considerable differences in
viscosity of obturation materials between
lateral compaction and warm filling
techniques and one must be confident in his/
her approach.
2. Maintaining apical patency is advocated
by many clinicians, but if the passage of
instruments to patency length is not restricted
to small instruments (#10 or #15) one will
destroy (widen) the apical constriction.
3. Because thermoplastic gutta-percha filling
techniques are so effective in filling unusual
canal aberrations, they have become the
technique of choice for endodontists.
4. The thermoplastic method emphasizes
heating the gutta-percha to increase its
flow characteristics, but when that flow is
not controlled one is apt to extrude large
amounts of filling material into the periapical
tissues. This potential for overfilling can be
particularly dangerous when the mandibular
nerve, the maxillary sinus, or the opened
apical foramen is at risk.
Final Considerations in Obturation
Prior to treatment one must closely inspect and
evaluate the tooth/root’s internal anatomy as well
as their root-tip relationship with maxillary and
mandibular structures.
1. Does this tooth have an open apex (immature
development and apical resorption)? Other
factors include root length, root width, canal
size, mineralization, internal resorption, etc.
Do the roots extend into the maxillary sinus
or approximate the mandibular canal? Is the
degree of canal curvature greater than 30
degrees? Does the root exhibit an “S” shaped
morphology? These questions can identify
teeth where routine endodontic techniques
may not meet the demands of a case and
referral is in order.
2. Are the materials biocompatible? Certain
sealers are neurotoxic. Sealers that contain
paraformaldehyde or other mutagenic or
carcinogenic substances must be avoided.
3. Though a little sealer extrusion may be well
tolerated and absorbed by the periapical
tissues over time, prevention is in order.
Toxicity will be destructive if compacted into
periradicular tissues, the maxillary sinus or
the mandibular canal.
4. Working length should be confirmed
electronically and radiographically and
maintained throughout instrumentation. The
apical constriction (cementodentinal junction
or CDJ) may involve multiple constrictions, be
apically narrowing over several millimeters,
or not exist.
5. Tactile readings alone are not dependable.
A negotiating file may bind anywhere along
the canal length and be misinterpreted as the
constriction.
6. The object of instrumentation is to provide a
glide path and a prepared apical constriction
for the insertion and compaction of gutta
percha. Poor length control leads to over-
instrumentation and overfilling.
[[PAGE 17]]
White PaperPage 17AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Preventing Obturation Mishaps
1. It is essential to image and clearly identify
radiographically the roots and surrounding
jaw structures in order to understand the
third dimension and risks of overfill.
2. It is critical to use obturation materials that
are well tolerated by the body after therapy,
rather than unsafe formulations such as
paraformaldehyde pastes that should not
be used in the good and safe practice of
endodontics.
3. The clinician must practice careful and
judicious shaping strategies that use multiple
confirmations of working length (electronic,
radiographic, tactile and paper points), in
order to take serious precaution against
overinstrumentation.
4. It is important to use “resistance form” in
controlling overfills. This “resistance form”
can be imparted during canal preparation by
producing funnel-form, tapered preparations
and by selecting gutta-percha cones to match
those canal shapes which will resist the
obturation forces which promote extrusion.
5. When using thermoplastic techniques, it is
important to respect the flow characteristics
of the materials and the heat energy used.
6. The use of paste-fillers and syringes for
applying endodontic sealers should not be
used when there is close proximity to neural
structures and control is compromised.
7. In cases of extreme proximity to the
neurovascular anatomy, the importance of
creating a clean dentin plug or bioceramic
barrier at the patent apical terminus should
be carefully planned when the risk of
extrusion is considerable.
Endodontic Retreatment
Periapical pathosis and/or persistent symptoms
associated with a previously endodontically
treated tooth or development of periradicular
pathosis in cases where a lesion was not present
indicates persistent disease. Persistent disease
following initial root canal treatment does not
necessitate nor obligate tooth extraction. Clinical
assessment and or enhanced imaging often
reveals the etiology of failure. Once the cause for
pathosis is identified, corrective action can be
taken.
Incomplete treatment, missed canals, poor
obturation, and coronal leakage are common
causes that can be corrected with retreatment
procedures. Procedural errors such as
perforation, apical transportation, ledging, loss
of length, and separated instruments may not
be correctable with a non-surgical retreatment
approach and are best treated with surgery by an
endodontic specialist. Retreatment cases vary in
complexity; require enhanced knowledge and
technical skills to remove coronal restorative
materials such as posts and cores and
obturation materials in addition to remaining
necrotic tissues and microbes. To accomplish
these tasks, varied specialized instruments and
armamentaria are required. The procedures are
precise, and microscopy is often necessary. In
addition, they are time consuming, and have a
slightly decreased prognosis compared to initial
root canal treatment. However, in general,
referral to an endodontic specialist is preferred
over extraction and will provide the best long
result for the patient.
The general dentist must be able to ascertain
the success and failure of endodontic treatment
procedures and recommend appropriate
corrective treatment options or consult with a
specialist.
[[PAGE 18]]
White PaperPage 18AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Restoration of
the Endodontically
Treated Tooth
Endodontic treatment is considered complete
following obturation of the root canal. However,
failure is inevitable in an improperly restored
tooth. Coronal leakage and fracture can occur
with any incompletely restored tooth. It is
suggested that when possible, the definitive
restoration of the access opening or placement of
the core buildup be performed upon completion
of the root canal therapy and under the rubber
dam. The additional procedure of the placement
of an intraorifice barrier following obturation
has been proposed to minimize these risks in case
of unforeseen delays in obtaining a definitive
coronal restoration. Additionally, intraorifice
barriers may reinforce intracoronal cracks to
minimize the chances of propagation into root
structure before a full coverage restoration can be
placed. The procedure for the intraorifice barrier
involves the placement of a flowable composite,
resin-modified glass ionomer cement or
bioceramic restorative material directly over the
canal obturation material within the canal orifice
followed by a temporary restoration, to allow for
a bonded seal when placement of a core buildup
or definitive access opening restoration cannot be
placed immediately.
It is a popular belief that endodontically treated
teeth are morebrittle due to loss of moisture in
the dentin. Yet research shows that moisture
loss may only slightly affect the collagen of
dentin and that an endodontically treated tooth’s
susceptibility to fracture is primarily caused by a
loss of structure due to caries, prior restorations,
fractured cusps and the access cavity and not the
loss of moisture.
Aging of dentin additionally promotes the
replacement of collagen by hydroxyapatite
mineral which makes a tooth more susceptible
to fracture by decreasing the dentin’s elasticity.
Therefore, the strongest tooth with the best
restorative prognosis is one that retains
maximum structural integrity of dentin and
enamel with minimal preparation and a
“protective” restoration.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist must
be able to recognize that a final restoration of
an endodontically treated tooth is considered an
integral part of the endodontic treatment. The
treatment plan for an endodontically-treated
tooth is considered incomplete until the tooth
is definitively restored in a timely and adequate
fashion.
INTENT STATEMENT: A practicing dentist must
be able to decide the appropriate restorative
strategy for an endodontically treated tooth by
evaluating tooth type, the extent and distribution of
tissue loss, as well as type and material of the final
restoration.
In determining prognosis, restoration of
endodontically treated teeth must be considered
as an integral part of the endodontic treatment
since it plays a major role in the long-term success
of the procedure as well as in tooth longevity.
In order to maximize the chances of success,
the distinctive characteristics of endodontically
treated teeth need to be carefully considered,
as well as the recent advances in adhesion,
digital technologies, and biomaterials. From
the founding of the specialty until the mid-
1980’s success was thought to be dependent
on the apical seal. Should leakage occur, it was
thought fluids would enter the apical canal space,
stagnate, break down, and re-enter the tissues
causing apical inflammation and disease. It is
now known that treatment failure is not due to
“apical percolation” but coronal bacterial leakage.
Placement of a definitive coronal restoration
must be considered when treatment planning
non-surgical endodontic therapy to eliminate
recontamination.
[[PAGE 19]]
White PaperPage 19AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Root-canal treatment cannot be successful
without timely and adequate definitive
restoration. It is clear from the literature that any
delay between endodontic treatment and tooth
restoration should be as brief as possible, since
numerous studies report that there is notably
reduced survival after endodontic treatment
for teeth restored with temporary restorations,
compared to those receiving a permanent
restoration. Consequently, when restorative care
cannot be completed immediately following
completion of root-canal treatment with the
rubber dam still in place, an intraorifice barrier
should be placed to prevent coronal leakage.
Providing a fluid-tight seal, preventing bacterial
leakage, and protecting the remaining tooth
structure will provide long-term stability
following the root-canal treatment. While only
one of many factors that the restorative dentist
needs to fulfill, failure to restore the tooth
adequately is unacceptable. In general dental
practice, patient expectations are related to the
restoration of masticatory function, esthetics, the
longevity of the restoration, or to more practical
factors such as chairside time or the cost of the
restorative procedure.
While cuspal coverage is typically recommended
in the posterior dentition following root canal
procedures, this may not be necessary in some
instances, since such a decision should depend
on the amount of remaining coronal tissue.
In teeth with minimal structural tissue loss,
intact marginal ridges, a conservative access
preparation, and no preexisting cracks, the
clinician may consider a direct intracoronal
bonded restoration as a valid option. It is less
expensive for the patient, conserves tooth
structure, is faster, efficient, and the patient leaves
the practice with a permanent restoration in a
single appointment.
Dental materials and techniques have evolved
greatly over the last decades. In particular,
resin-based composites, which can be
micromechanically and chemically bonded to
the dental tissues, have become more and more
reliable. By tradition, some dentists continue
to use metal posts to retain bonded composite
restorations while they accordingly should be
replaced by fiber-reinforced resin-based posts
which are more protective of remaining structure;
or possibly by no posts at all. This is supported
by the fact that a ferrule should be obtained on
all endodontically treated teeth. If a 2 mm ferrule
can be obtained for any protective restoration, a
post is not needed to retain a bonded buildup. A
ferrule is generally considered to be extremely
important to prevent dislodging forces that will
lead to coronal leakage. Cusps should be covered
if structural loss has damaged marginal ridges or
undermined coronal walls.
Root-canal treatment itself does not seem to
significantly weaken dental structures; increased
susceptibility to fracture appears to be due, in the
majority, to coronal and pericervical hard tissue
removal. Three major technological developments
are challenging the way endodontically treated
teeth have been restored:
1. Adhesive dentistry and the development
of increasingly more dependable dental
adhesives
2. The rise of digital technology, enabling the
rapid and reliable design and manufacture of
cuspal-coverage restorations in practice
3. The development of biomaterials, with
characteristics more compatible to replaced
tissues
[[PAGE 20]]
White PaperPage 20AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Restorative concepts should be specific to each
tooth type, since each is submitted to very
different challenges during function. Molar teeth
are mostly challenged by axial forces of high
intensity. Since root canal treatment weakens
teeth due to loss of structure, there is a particular
need to adequately protect endodontically treated
posterior teeth against tooth fracture. The major
cause for increased susceptibility to fracture of
endodontically treated teeth appears to be the
loss of hard tissue. Endodontically treated teeth
undeniably often undergo additional dentin
removal in the process of the restoration in
creating a post space as well as preparation for
full crowns and occlusal reduction of thin dentin
walls. In this regard, it is quite telling that a major
cause of further tissue damage is dentistogenic.
In light of this paradox, it is important to weigh
the necessity or rationale of additional tissue
sacrifice.
The ultimate goal of dentistry is to retain a
healthy complement of teeth for a lifetime;
therefore, appropriate strategies should be
“preservative”, with existing tissues conserved as
much as possible. In this regard, it is significant
to consider certain advances and evolutions
made over the past few decades that are of prime
importance when considering the best way to
restore endodontically treated teeth: adhesive
dentistry, digital technology, and biomaterials
that are “protective” of remaining structure.
Generally, goals of the restoration of teeth after
endodontic treatment can be summarized in
three main objectives: to restore tooth function, to
prevent infection or reinfection of the root canal
space by providing a fluid-tight seal and to protect
the remaining tooth structure against further
tissue damage.
The dental ferrule refers to a circumferential
band of dentin of at least 1–2 mm coronal to the
margin of the preparation for a full crown. It has
been suggested that the presence of a ferrule may
reinforce and stabilize endodontically treated
teeth, defined by a “ferrule effect”. Research has
observed that an adequate ferrule lowers the
impact of the other factors such as post and core
systems, luting agents, or crown material on the
survival of endodontically restored teeth. The
research clearly states that restorative failure
is not seen when sufficient coronal dentin is
available because the restoration does not rely
heavily on the bonding of restorative materials to
the root dentin. Considering clinical data, on the
subject of post utilization, evidence finds that the
use of post retention had no significant influence
on tooth survival after endodontic treatment.
Restoration of Anterior Teeth
The type of final restoration recommended for
an anterior tooth after endodontic therapy is
determined by the amount of remaining tooth
structure. If the only loss of tooth structure results
from a conservative access preparation, a bonded
composite is adequate. If the tooth is weakened
by a large or misdirected access preparation
or proximal caries and/or restoration, a crown
should be considered as the final restoration.
A post is necessary when the remaining tooth
structure (after crown preparation) will not retain
the core. A post should be avoided whenever
possible in order to reduce the possibility of root
fracture.
Restoration of Posterior Teeth
The average person can exert enormous forces on
posterior teeth, or about nine times the amount
of force that is exerted on anterior teeth during
closure. This force can result in over 200 pounds
per square inch of stress applied to posterior
restorations. Therefore, cusps of posterior teeth
must be protected against vertical fracture.
Proper restoration of posterior teeth involves two
phases: core placement and crown placement.
[[PAGE 21]]
White PaperPage 21AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Contemporary Post Philosophy
The function of a post is to retain a core
restoration. The function of a core restoration is to
retain a crown. If core retention is not necessary,
a post is not indicated. To reduce the potential
of vertical root fracture a post should be placed
only when necessary for core retention. The most
important factor influencing whether a post will
be necessary is the amount of supporting tooth
structure remaining after crown preparation and
the development of a ferrule. If three supporting
walls of dentin remain, a post is not necessary.
All metal posts, regardless of design or type of
cement used, transmit forces developed during
mastication to the root of the tooth, and thus,
can promote fracture over time if the root is
structurally compromised. Nonmetal posts offer a
more compatible material to be placed adjacent to
dentin to prevent the fracture problem associated
with metal posts. These posts are bonded in the
canal and have some degree of flexibility (similar
to the modulus of elasticity of dentin).
Biomimetic restoration
The research and study of interdisciplinary
materials-science is termed “biomimetics”.
Inherent in the definition of biomimetics in
dentistry is the recovery or mimicking of the
biomechanics of the original tooth by the
restorative material. Traditional restorative
techniques have incorporated corono-radicular
materials that were more diverse in their
behavior when compared to dentin. Since many
endodontically treated teeth are restored with
numerous material components (e.g., gold/
stainless steel/ceramic/composite, alloy) the
potential for these materials to behave differently
than dentin under dynamic function or thermal
expansion may affect the resultant modulus of
elasticity, tensile and compressive strength of
each tooth and its remaining structure. Choosing
restoratives with similar material traits to
dentin is a strong trend in dentistry and in the
rehabilitation of endodontically treated teeth.
In summary, a full crown is not universally
required after root canal treatment. Evidence
indicates that placement of a crown following
nonsurgical root canal treatment enhances the
restorative prognosis primarily by providing
cuspal protection. Factors such as tooth type,
extent and distribution of tissue loss, as well
as type and material of the final restoration
need to be considered to decide the appropriate
restorative strategy for an endodontically
treated tooth to last a lifetime. Universal crown
placement after root canal treatment is probably
overtreatment.
[[PAGE 22]]
White PaperPage 22AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Suggested Reading
Disinfection
Chow TW. Mechanical effectiveness of root canal
irrigation. J Endod. 1983;9:475-9.
Clegg MS, Vertucci FJ, Walker C, Belanger M,
Britto LR. The effect of exposure to irrigant
solutions on apical dentin biofilms in vitro.
J Endod. 2006;32:434-7.
Goncalves LS, Rodrigues RC, Andrade Junior
CV, Soares RG, Vettore MV. The effect of sodium
hypochlorite and chlorhexidine as irrigant
solutions for root canal disinfection: a systematic
review of clinical trials. J Endod. 2016;42:527-32.
Gu LS, Huang XQ, Griffin B, Bergeron BR, Pashley
DH, Niu LN, et al. Primum non nocere - The effects
of sodium hypochlorite on dentin as used in
endodontics. Acta Biomater. 2017;61:144-56.
Guivarc’h M, Ordioni U, Ahmed HM, Cohen S,
Catherine JH, Bukiet F. Sodium hypochlorite
accident: a systematic review. J Endod. 2017;
43:16-24.
Kakehashi S, Stanley HR, Fitzgerald RJ. The effects
of surgical exposures of dental pulps in germ-free
and conventional laboratory rats. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol. 1965;20:340-9.
Konstantinidi E, Psimma Z, Chavez de Paz LE,
Boutsioukis C. Apical negative pressure irrigation
versus syringe irrigation: a systematic review of
cleaning and disinfection of the root canal system.
Int Endod J. 2017;50:1034-54.
Liang YH, Jiang LM, Jiang L, Chen XB, Liu YY,
Tian FC, et al. Radiographic healing after a root
canal treatment performed in single-rooted teeth
with and without ultrasonic activation of the
irrigant: a randomized controlled trial. J Endod.
2013;39:1218-25.
Moorer WR, Wesselink PR. Factors promoting
the tissue dissolving capability of sodium
hypochlorite. Int Endod J. 1982;15:187-96.
Ricucci D, Siqueira JF, Jr. Biofilms and apical
periodontitis: study of prevalence and association
with clinical and histopathologic findings. J Endod.
2010;36:1277-88.
Sathorn C, Parashos P, Messer H. Antibacterial
efficacy of calcium hydroxide intracanal dressing:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int Endod
J. 2007;40:2-10.
Sjogren U, Figdor D, Persson S, Sundqvist G.
Influence of infection at the time of root filling
on the outcome of endodontic treatment of teeth
with apical periodontitis. Int Endod J. 1997;30:
297-306.
Access Preparation and Instrumentation
Outcomes: long term retention in function,
which includes treatment of apical periodontitis
Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. Tooth survival
following non-surgical root canal treatment: a
systematic review of the literature. Int Endod J.
2010;43:171-189.
Song M, Kim HC, Lee W, Kim E. Analysis of
the cause of failure in nonsurgical endodontic
treatment by microscopic inspection during
endodontic microsurgery. J Endod. 2011;37:
1516-1519.
Landys Boren D, Jonasson P, Kvist T. Long-term
survival of endodontically treated teeth at a public
dental specialist clinic. J Endod. 2015;41:176-181.
Access Cavity Preparation
Identify and Reveal all Major Canal Orifices
Using Appropriate Technology
Karabucak B, Bunes A, Chehoud C, Kohli MR,
Setzer F. Prevalence of apical periodontitis in
endodontically treated premolars and molars
with untreated canal: a cone-beam computed
tomography study. J Endod. 2016;42:538-541.
Khalighinejad N, Aminoshariae A, Kulild JC,
Williams KA, Wang J, Mickel A. The effect of the
dental operating microscope on the outcome of
nonsurgical root canal treatment: a retrospective
case-control study. J Endod. 2017;43:728-732.
[[PAGE 23]]
White PaperPage 23AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Retain Structure and Avoid Iatrogenic Errors
Boveda C, Kishen A. Contracted endodontic
cavities: the foundation for less invasive
alternatives in the management of apical
periodontitis. Endodontic Topics. 2015;33:169-186.
Reeh ES, Messer HH, Douglas WH. Reduction
in tooth stiffness as a result of endodontic and
restorative procedures. J Endod. 1989;15:512-516.
Fuss Z, Trope M. Root perforations: classification
and treatment choices based on prognostic
factors. Endod Dent Traumatol. 1996;12:255-264.
Clinical Procedures
Buhrley LJ, Barrows MJ, BeGole EA, Wenckus CS.
Effect of magnification on locating the MB2 canal
in maxillary molars. J Endod. 2002;28:324-327.
Johnson BR. Endodontic access. Gen Dent.
2009;57:570-577; quiz 578-579, 595, 679.
Canal Preparation: Appropriate Access for
Antimicrobials to the Root Canal System
Aminoshariae A, Kulild J. Master apical file
size - smaller or larger: a systematic review of
microbial reduction. Int Endod J. 2015;48:
1007-1022.
Nair PN, Henry S, Cano V, Vera J. Microbial status
of apical root canal system of human mandibular
first molars with primary apical periodontitis
after “one-visit” endodontic treatment. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod.
2005;99:231-252.
Siqueira JF, Jr., Araujo MC, Garcia PF, Fraga
RC, Dantas CJ. Histological evaluation of the
effectiveness of five instrumentation techniques
for cleaning the apical third of root canals.
J Endod. 1997;23:499-502.
Requirements in Length and Size
Ricucci D, Langeland K. Apical limit of root
canal instrumentation and obturation, part 2. A
histological study. Int Endod J. 1998;31:394-409.
Elayouti A, Dima E, Judenhofer MS, Lost C, Pichler
BJ. Increased apical enlargement contributes to
excessive dentin removal in curved root canals: a
stepwise microcomputed tomography study.
J Endod. 2011;37:1580-1584.
Rodrigues RCV, Zandi H, Kristoffersen AK,
Enersen M, Mdala I, Orstavik D, et al. Influence of
the apical preparation size and the irrigant type
on bacterial reduction in root canal-treated teeth
with apical periodontitis. J Endod. 2017;43:
1058-1063.
Iatrogenic Errors and their Prevention
Lambrianidis T. Ledging and blockage of
root canals during canal preparation: causes,
recognition, prevention, management, and
outcomes. Endodontic Topics. 2009;15:56-74.
Gorni FG, Gagliani MM. The outcome of
endodontic retreatment: a 2-yr follow-up. J Endod.
2004;30:1-4.
Schafer E, Schulz-Bongert U, Tulus G. Comparison
of hand stainless steel and nickel titanium
rotary instrumentation: a clinical study. J Endod.
2004;30:432-435.
Clinical Quality
Burry JC, Stover S, Eichmiller F, Bhagavatula
P. Outcomes of primary endodontic therapy
provided by endodontic specialists compared with
other providers. J Endod. 2016;42:702-705.
Siqueira Jr JF, Perez AR, Marceliano-Alves MF,
Provenzano JC, Silva SG, Pires FR, et al. What
happens to unprepared root canal walls: a
correlative analysis using micro-computed
tomography and histology/scanning electron
microscopy. Int Endod J. 2017.
Paredes-Vieyra J, Enriquez FJ. Success rate of
single-versus two-visit root canal treatment of
teeth with apical periodontitis: a randomized
controlled trial. J Endod. 2012;38:1164-1169.
[[PAGE 24]]
White PaperPage 24AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Obturation
Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. A prospective study
of the factors affecting outcomes of nonsurgical
root canal treatment: part 1: periapical health.
Int Endod J. 2011;44:583–609.
Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. A prospective study
of the factors affecting outcomes of non-surgical
root canal treatment: part 2: tooth survival.
Int Endod J. 2011;44:610–25.
Sjögren U, Hagglund B, Sundqvist G, Wing
K. Factors affecting the long-term results of
endodontic treatment. J Endod. 1990;16:498–504.
Vera J, Hernàndez EM, Romero M, Arias A, van
der Sluis LWM. Effect of maintaining apical
patency on irrigant penetration into the apical
two millimeters of large root canals: an in vivo
study. J Endod. 2012;38:1340–3.
Schaeffer MA, White RR, Walton RE. Determining
the optimal obturation length: a meta-analysis of
literature. J Endod. 2005;31:271–4.
Siqueira JF. Aetiology of root canal treatment
failure: why well-treated teeth can fail. Int Endod
J. 2001;34:1–10.
Wu MK, Dummer PMH, Wesselink PR.
Consequences of and strategies to deal with
residual post-treatment root canal infection.
Int Endod J. 2006;39:343–56.
Ricucci D, Rocas IN, Alves FR, Loghin S, Siqueira
Jr JF. Apically extruded sealers: fate and influence
on treatment outcome. J Endod. 2016;42:243–9.
Gluskin AH, Anatomy of an Overfill: a reflection
on the process. Endodontic Topics. 2009; vol.16,
pgs. 64-81.
Sjögren U, Figdor D, Persson S, Sundqist G.
Influence of infection at the time of root filling
on the outcome of endodontic treatment of teeth
with apical periodontitis. Int Endod J. 1997;30:
297–306.
Whitworth J. Methods of filling root canals:
Principles and practices. Endod Topics. 2005; 12:
2-24.
Pitts DL, Jones JE, Oswald RJ. A histological
comparison of calcium hydroxide plugs and
dentin plugs used for the control of gutta-percha
root canal filling material. J Endod. 1984;10:
283–293.
Restoration
Beach C, Calhoun J, Bramwell D, Hutter J, Miller
G. Clinical evaluation of bacterial leakage of
endodontic temporary filling materials. J Endod.
1996;22:459-62.
Chailertvanitkul P, Saunders WP, Saunders EM,
MacKenzie D. An evaluation of microbial coronal
leakage in the restored pulp chamber of root-
canal treated multirooted teeth. Int Endod J.
1997;30: 318-22.
Galvan RR, West LA, Liewehr FR, Pashley DH.
Coronal microleakage of five materials used to
create an intracoronal seal in endodontically
treated teeth. J Endod. 2002;28:59-61.
John AD, Webb TD, Imamura G, Goodell GG. Fluid
flow evaluation of Fuji Triage and gray and white
ProRoot mineral trioxide aggregate intraorifice
barriers. J Endod. 2008;34:830-2.
Juloski J, Radovic I, Goracci C, Vulicevic ZR,
Ferrari M. Ferrule effect: a literature review.
J Endod. 2012;38:11–9.
Khayat A, Lee SJ, Torabinejad M. Human saliva
penetration of coronally unsealed obturated root
canals. J Endod. 1993;19:458-61.
Kishen A. Mechanisms and risk factors for
fracture predilection in endodontically treated
teeth. Endod Topics. 2006;13:57–83.
Kuttler S, McLean A, Dorn S, Fischzang A. The
impact of post space preparation with Gates-
Glidden drills on residual dentin thickness in
distal roots of mandibular molars. J Am Den Assoc.
2004;135:903–9.
Magura ME, Kafrawy AH, Brown CE, Newton CW.
Human saliva coronal microleakage in obturated
root canals. J Endod. 1991;17:324-31.
[[PAGE 25]]
The guidance in this statement is not intended to
substitute for a clinician’s independent judgment in light
of the conditions and needs of a specific patient.
Access additional resources at aae.org. © 2020 American Association of Endodontists (AAE).White Paper
Page 25AAE W hite Paper – Treatment Standards
Mavec JC, McClanahan SB, Minah GE, Johnson JD,
Blundell RE. Effects of an intracanal glass ionomer
barrier on coronal microleakage in teeth with
post space. J Endod. 2006;32:120-2.
Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. A prospective study
of the factors affecting outcomes of non-surgical
root canal treatment: part 2: tooth survival. Int
Endod J. 2011;44:610–25.
Ng YL, Mann V, Gulabivala K. Tooth survival
following non-surgical root canal treatment: a
systematic review of the literature. Int Endod J.
2010;43:171–89.
Ray HA, Trope M. Periapical status of
endodontically treated teeth in relation to the
technical quality of the root filling and the coronal
restoration. Int Endod J. 1995;28:12–18.
Reeh ES, Messer HH, Douglas WH. Reduction
in tooth stiffness as a result of endodontic and
restorative procedures. J Endod. 1989;15:512–516.
Sedgley CM, Messer HH. Are endodontically
treated teeth more brittle? J Endod. 1992;18:
332–335.
Schwartz RS, Robbins JW. Post placement and
restoration of endodontically treated teeth: a
literature review. J Endod. 2004;30:289–301.
Schwartz RS, Fransman R. Adhesive dentistry and
endodontics: materials, clinical strategies and
procedures for restoration of access cavities: a
review. J Endod. 2005; 31:151–165.
Shariff SS, Davis MC. Success and survival
of endodontically treated cracked teeth with
radicular extensions: a 2- to 4-year prospective
cohort. J Endod. 2019;45:848-855.
Sterzenbach G. et al. Rigid versus Flexible
Dentine-like Endodontic Posts—Clinical testing
of a Biomechanical Concept: Seven-year Results
of a Randomized Controlled Clinical Pilot Trial
on Endodontically Treated Abutment Teeth with
Severe Hard Tissue Loss. J Endod. 2012;38:1557-63
Swanson K, Madison S. An evaluation of coronal
microleakage in endodontically treated teeth. Part
I. time periods. J Endod. 1987;13:56-9.
Torabinejad M, Ung B, Kettering JD. In vitro
bacterial penetration of coronally unsealed
endodontically treated teeth. J Endod. 1990;16:
566-9.
Webber RT, del Rio CE, Brady JM, Segall RO.
Sealing quality of a temporary filling material.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1978;46:123-30.
Wolcott JF, Hicks ML, Himel VT. Evaluation of
pigmented intraorifice barriers in endodontically
treated teeth. J Endod. 1999;25:589-92.
