[[PAGE 1]]
Page 1Position Statement
AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
Introduction
The American Association of Endodontists is
dedicated to excellence in endodontics and
promoting the highest standards of patient care.
This following position statement is intended
to define and outline Maxillary Sinusitis of
Endodontic Origin (MSEO), deliver guidelines
for its diagnosis and appropriate treatment, and
provide a standard for all dental and medical
practitioners who undertake the responsibility of
managing patients with this condition.
The relationship between dental infections
and sinus disease is widely recognized in both
the dental and medical literature. Despite
extensive scientific recognition and reported high
prevalence, periapical infection manifesting in
the maxillary sinus remains under-appreciated
and frequently goes undiagnosed by dentists,
otolaryngologists, and radiologists alike, with
its sequelae often misdiagnosed as sinogenic
sinusitis. Recognition of MSEO is critical as failure
to identify and properly manage the endodontic
source pathology will result in the persistence
of sinus disease, the failure of medical sinus
therapies, and the potential advancement to more
serious or even life-threatening cranio-facial
infections.
Incidence and Recognition
The pathological extension of dental disease
into the maxillary sinus is well documented in
the dental and medical literature and was first
referred to by Bauer in 1943 as maxillary sinusitis
of dental origin (MSDO).1 Numerous investigators
since have discovered that this is a prevalent
and common disease process.2-23,25 Abrahams et
al.2 have reported that infections of maxillary
posterior teeth show maxillary sinus pathology
in 60% of the cases, while Mattila3 found sinus
mucosal hyperplasia present in approximately
80% of teeth with periapical osteitis. Obayashi
et al.4 found maxillary sinus mucosal changes in
71.3% of patients with infections originating in
the maxillary canines, premolars and molars.
While it has often been quoted and generally
accepted that dental infections account for
approximately 10 to 12% of all cases of maxillary
sinusitis,5-9 the primary source for this figure
provides no epidemiological data to support
it.5,10 More recent literature strongly supports
the conclusion that the incidence of MSDO, also
termed odontogenic sinusitis, is likely much
higher, particularly in chronic cases. Melen et
al.11
, in a study of 198 patients with 244 cases
of chronic bacterial maxillary sinusitis, found
a dental etiology in 40.6% of the cases. Maillet
et al.12 reviewed 82 cone beam computed
tomography (CBCT) scans that had findings
consistent with maxillary sinusitis for evidence of
a dental pathology and concluded that over 50%
of these cases were of dental etiology. Bomeli et
al.13 found that the more severe the sinus disease,
the more likely it was to be associated with dental
pathology, with up to 86% of severely affected
maxillary sinuses having a dental etiology for
the infection. Matsumoto et al.14 found that 72%
of unilateral sinusitis cases had an odontogenic
source.
Despite the reported high prevalence of MSDO,
and the persistence of sinus disease if the
odontogenic source remains, this condition
frequently goes unrecognized by radiologists,
dentists, and otolaryngologists - Ear, Nose and
Throat (ENT) specialists.15 In two separate
case series evaluating odontogenic sinusitis,
Maxillary Sinusitis of
Endodontic Origin
[[PAGE 2]]
Position StatementPage 2AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
approximately two-thirds of the identifiable
dental pathology went unreported by radiologists
on sinus computed tomography (CT) scans.16,17
It was also found that routine general dental
examination using periapical radiographs failed
to diagnose odontogenic maxillary sinusitis in
86% of the cases.16 Melen et al.11 similarly reported
that 56 out of 99 (55%) odontogenic maxillary
sinusitis cases were missed on routine dental
examination and dental radiography.
Although the medical literature provides ample
studies and review articles regarding the high
prevalence of odontogenic sinusitis with the
specific recommendation for dental or endodontic
examination and treatment, published guidelines
for the management of sinusitis rarely address the
need to rule out or treat a potential odontogenic
source. The current Clinical Practice Guidelines for
the Management of Adult Rhinosinusitis, published
by The American Academy of Otolaryngology
– Head and Neck Surgery Foundation, makes
no mention of the potential for an odontogenic
cause for sinusitis, nor does it make any
recommendation for a dental or endodontic
examination to rule out or treat an odontogenic
source for sinusitis.24 Out of 85 sinusitis
guidelines, published between 1998 and 2010,
only eleven mentioned an odontogenic cause for
sinusitis and only three gave a recommendation
for a dental examination.16 None of the published
sinusitis guidelines made the recommendation to
refer to endodontic specialists, who are uniquely
trained and equipped to diagnose and treat
odontogenic infections.
Presentation and Definitions
Inflammatory responses of the maxillary
sinus to dental infection can present with
varied symptoms, clinical progression, and
radiographic presentations. Odontogenic sinus
infections may produce only a minimal, often
asymptomatic local reaction in the antral floor
periosteum and/or mucosa for months or even
years.25 However, a pathologically altered
mucosa is impaired and less resistant than
an intact one to infection, and is a pathogenic
factor in the progression to rhinosinusitis.26,27
Depending on dental pathogenicity, anatomic
factors, the extent of mucosal edema, and sinus
ostial patency, periradicular inflammation
may progress beyond the antral floor causing a
partial or total obstruction of the maxillary sinus
with symptoms and radiographic presentation
common to sinogenic sinusitis. The condition
can further ascend to involve the nasal cavity,
ethmoid, and frontal sinuses, and in rare, severe
cases can spread via the maxillary sinus causing
orbital cellulitis, blindness, meningitis, subdural
empyema, brain abscess and life-threatening
cavernous sinus thrombosis.4,28-31
The terms MSDO, odontogenic sinusitis,
odontogenic rhinosinusitis, and odontogenic
maxillary sinusitis are all used synonymously in
the current literature to describe various levels
of mucosal inflammation and symptoms, caused
by multiple odontogenic etiologies, including
periodontal disease, endodontic disease, root
fractures, dental implants, dental extractions,
oro-antral fistulae, and iatrogenic causes such
as extruded dental materials, displaced teeth
and foreign bodies.2,6,7,25,32-35 While these are all
odontogenic sources for sinusitis, it is important
to distinguish these etiologies from maxillary
sinusitis of endodontic origin (MSEO), as
they each require markedly different clinical
treatments. Furthermore, combining these very
different etiologies under a single term can create
confusion that may impede understanding of the
disease processes and potential post-treatment
management. MSEO is a new term, coined with
this document, and refers specifically to sinusitis
secondary to periradicular disease of endodontic
origin, excluding sinusitis secondary to other
dental etiologies. Previously termed “the endo-
antral syndrome” by Seldon,18-20 MSEO requires
an accurate diagnosis of the condition followed by
appropriate endodontic treatment or extraction
to remove the source of endodontic pathogens
associated with the periapical disease and
secondary sinus infection.
[[PAGE 3]]
Position StatementPage 3AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
Diagnosis of MSEO
1. Dental and Sinonasal History and Symptoms
Diagnosis of MSEO begins with a thorough
medical and dental history. The clinician
must recognize that patients with MSEO may
experience a wide variation of dental and
sinonasal symptoms including no symptoms.
Common sinonasal symptoms include congestion,
rhinorrhea, retrorhinorrhea, facial pain, and foul
odor.36,37 Typical endodontic symptoms such as
thermal pain, periapical sensitivity, swelling, and/
or draining intraoral sinus tract are often not
present with MSEO. Thermal pain is not typically
present because source teeth for MSEO are either
necrotic or have failing endodontic therapy.
Periapical tenderness is typically absent in
MSEO because periapical infection is essentially
draining into the sinus via fistula, eliminating
pressure. For this same reason, swelling or
intraoral sinus tracts rarely form. There are
of course no absolutes, as multi-rooted teeth
have the potential for both sinus and intraoral
presentations.
Patients with primary sinonasal symptoms and
without localized dental pain will typically first
seek care from their primary care physician
or ENT specialist who may misdiagnose and
treat MSEO as a primary sinus infection since
dental infections are easily overlooked during
routine ENT examinations.15,16,37 Physicians
must always be aware that a lack of dental
symptoms or complaint does not rule out dental
etiology for sinusitis, and recognize that current
clinical guidelines for the medical management
of rhinosinusitis do not offer guidance in this
area.24 Physicians must also recognize that
lack of sinonasal symptoms does not rule out
a dental etiology for mucosal abnormalities or
sinus obstruction. Rhinosinusitis is defined as
symptomatic inflammation of the paranasal
sinuses and nasal cavity, and therefore
management of rhinosinusitis is based primarily
on patient symptoms rather than imaging
findings.24 Considering this, mucosal changes
and periradicular findings seen on imaging that
are not coupled with patient symptoms may
be dismissed as incidental, to the detriment
of patients exhibiting dental abscesses and/or
associated periapical mucositis. If periapical
findings are noted on sinus CT imaging, or sinus
floor mucosal changes appear to have potential
dental etiology, these patients should be referred
to an endodontist for evaluation to rule out or
resolve any dental pathology, even if the patient is
dentally asymptomatic.17
Findings that should raise the suspicion of
MSEO are a history of repeated episodes of
unilateral maxillary sinus infections, particularly
when associated with a patent sinus ostium
or previously unsuccessful sinus surgery.17 A
cooperative relationship between endodontists
and ENT specialists is imperative for diagnosing
MSEO and distinguishing it from sinogenic
sinusitis. Endodontists should keep sinonasal
disease in mind when diagnosing and treating
MSEO, and should not attempt to make a final
diagnosis of non-odontogenic sinus disease, nor
offer treatment that is outside the scope of dental
practice.
2. Radiographic Examination
While periapical radiographs are the most
widely used imaging modality in endodontics,
the posterior maxilla presents significant and
unique interpretation challenges when using
conventional 2-D imaging.38 Anatomic structures
such as the zygomatic and palatal processes,
maxillary sinus cortical floor, and buccal cortical
plate are often superimposed onto the dental
roots, obscuring or concealing periradicular
inflammatory changes. Visualizing the apices of
the maxillary posterior teeth is further obscured
when maxillary sinus mucosal thickening is
present. Conventional periapical radiographs
also do not consistently reveal mucosal soft tissue
changes or air-fluid levels in the sinus, which are
of great diagnostic value in MSEO.39
Limited field CBCT imaging has been shown
to significantly improve the ability to detect
odontogenic sources for sinusitis. In a study by
Low et al.40
, comparing periapical radiography
and CBCT for preoperative diagnosis in 74
posterior maxillary teeth consecutively referred
[[PAGE 4]]
Position StatementPage 4AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
for apical surgery, CBCT revealed 34% more
lesions than periapical radiography, as well as
significantly more expansion of lesions into the
maxillary sinus, sinus membrane thickening,
and untreated canals. The same investigation
also showed that with the use of CBCT imaging,
mucosal changes associated with dental infections
were found with a prevalence of 77%, compared
to only 19% using conventional radiographs.
Lofthag-Hansen et al.39 compared CBCT and
intraoral radiography for the diagnosis of
periapical pathology and found that thickening
of the mucous membrane of the maxillary sinus
was identified more than four times as often with
CBCT imaging than with periapical radiographs,
and all observers agreed that in 70% of the cases
CBCT provided clinically relevant information not
found in the periapical radiographs. Shahbazian
et al.41
, examining 145 dental records, found
that periapical radiography could only identify
approximately 40% of apical periodontitis on
posterior maxillary teeth, and 3% of all apical
infections extending into the sinus that were seen
on CBCT. They also concluded that periapical
radiographs are not adequate in observing the
anatomical relationship between maxillary
molars and the sinus floor.
Periapical inflammation is often responsible for
distinct maxillary sinus radiographic changes
that differ significantly from typical periradicular
radiolucencies observed in alveolar bone.42
Two unique radiographic findings associated
with periradicular inflammation of the sinus
mucoperiosteum are periapical osteoperiostitis
and periapical mucositis.43 Both conditions
can progress further to a partial or total sinus
obstruction.
Periapical Osteoperiostitis (PAO)
The presence of apical periodontitis adjacent
to the maxillary sinus cortical floor will often
expand the sinus periosteum, displace it upward
into the sinus, and subsequently induce a
periosteal reaction that continues to deposit a
thin layer of new bone on the inner periphery
of the periosteum as it expands. This reactive
osteogenesis, termed periapical osteoperiostitis
(PAO), forms a thin, hard-tissue dome on the sinus
floor and presents on radiographs and CT images
as a radiopaque “halo” appearance.43 (Fig 1) If
the inflammatory process continues, the bone
deposits can become thicker and expand deeper
into the maxillary sinus. PAO lesions may or may
not be symptomatic and may be accompanied by
varying degrees of adjacent mucosal edema and
sinus fluid levels, particularly if a perforation
occurs in the periosteum and osseous tissue.44,45
Figure 1. Periapical osteoperiostitis. A. Periapical radiograph of the
posterior left maxilla. Clinical exam confirmed a necrotic maxillary
left second molar, however any periapical and sinus abnormalities are
obscured by the zygoma. B. CBCT image of the same necrotic left
maxillary second molar displaying an osteoperiostitis or “halo” lesion
(arrow) with associated mucosal edema of the left maxillary sinus.
Periapical Mucositis (PAM)
It is not uncommon for the root apices of
maxillary posterior teeth to project through
the maxillary sinus cortical floor and directly
contact the antral mucosa, or for periapical
abscesses to perforate the sinus cortical floor and
periosteum. Symptomatic or asymptomatic apical
periodontitis in direct contact with or adjacent
to the antral mucosa will typically produce a
localized mucosal tissue edema termed periapical
mucositis (PAM), which appears on CT imaging
as a mucosal thickening or dome-shaped soft
tissue expansion in the floor of the sinus directly
adjacent to the infected root apex.43 (Figs 2 and
3) Periradicular inflammation from dental roots
not directly adjacent to the sinus mucosa can also
cause PAM without any evident inflammatory
bone resorption via extension of inflammatory
mediators through bone marrow, blood vessels,
and lymphatics.1
[[PAGE 5]]
Position StatementPage 5AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
Because there is often no evident osseous
destruction or PAO halo, PAM is more difficult
to recognize radiographically than typical
endodontic lesions and may be misinterpreted
as an insignificant or incidental finding. Mucosal
edema on the sinus floor and particularly dome-
shaped mucosal swellings directly over dental
root apices should raise the suspicion of a dental
etiology. Clinicians should be mindful, however,
that PAM may have a similar appearance to
mucous retention cysts, antral polyps, mucosal
thickening caused by periodontal disease,
and sinogenic mucosal thickening. As with
all endodontic diagnoses, a determination of
etiology cannot be made based on radiographic
examination alone. Careful endodontic clinical
examination of pulpal status is imperative
to distinguish PAM from other mucosal
abnormalities.
Figure 2. Periapical mucositis. A. Periapical radiograph of the posterior
left maxilla. Clinical exam confirmed a necrotic maxillary left second
molar. B. CBCT image reveals mucosal edema on the floor of the left
maxillary sinus (arrow) with no evident osseous lesion. C. Periapical
radiograph following endodontic treatment of the second molar. D.
3-month post-operative CBCT image showing full resolution of the
mucosal edema.
Figure 3. Periapical mucositis. A. Periapical radiograph of a failing root
canal therapy of the maxillary second bicuspid. B. CBCT image of the
apical periodontitis perforating the antral cortical floor and associated
periosteum causing a localized, dome-shaped inflammatory edema of
the sinus mucosal tissue (arrow).
Sinus Obstruction from MSEO
Full or partial sinus obstruction is very evident
on sinus CT imaging, but may be more difficult to
recognize as having an endodontic etiology. (Fig
4) Careful radiographic examination for evidence
of PAO is helpful in making this determination
but, as seen with PAM lesions, periapical
radiolucencies or osseous changes do not always
exist. A history of unilateral sinus obstruction,
particularly if recurrent and/or associated with
a patent infundibulum is a strong indicator for
possible MSEO. Clinical endodontic examination,
however, is essential to confirm or rule out a
potential endodontic source.17
Figure 4. MSEO sinus obstruction. A. Coronal CT image of a fully
obstructed right maxillary sinus (large arrow). The patient had
experienced recurrent right maxillary sinus infections and nasal
congestion for more than four years with no resolution despite multiple
antibiotic regimens and adjunctive sinus treatments. An associated
periapical osteoperiostitis lesion is evident over the palatal root apex
of the necrotic right maxillary first molar (small arrow). B. 3-month
postoperative coronal CT image showing full resolution of the maxillary
rhinosinusitis following endodontic therapy of the maxillary first molar.
No other sinus treatment was performed, nor antibiotics administered.
[[PAGE 6]]
Position StatementPage 6AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
3. Clinical Examination
When diagnosing a possible endodontic etiology
in patients with rhinosinusitis, the clinician
must perform a thorough clinical endodontic
examination to evaluate for any pulpal necrosis
and periapical disease, while carefully evaluating
all prior endodontic treatments for possible
failure in the suspected quadrant. Endodontic
evaluation of pulpal and periapical tissues
includes thermal testing, electric pulp vitality
testing, percussion, palpation, periodontal probing
and mobility tests. A healthy vital pulp will not
contribute to any periradicular or odontogenic
sinus inflammation. While an inflamed vital
pulp with root apices proximal to the sinus floor
may generate enough inflammatory mediators
to induce minor sinus mucosal changes, it is
unlikely to contribute to any significant sinonasal
disease or sinonasal symptoms.45 For a periapical
infection to occur, microorganisms must be
present.46 Only those teeth with an infected
necrotic pulp or failing endodontic treatment
will generate MSEO. When examining maxillary
posterior teeth with existing root canal treatment,
one must carefully examine for any untreated
or sub-optimally filled canals, inadequate core
restorations, or leaking coronal restorations that
may provide evidence of endodontic failure and a
bacterial source for MSEO.4
Treatment of MSEO
Successful management of MSEO, as with any
infection of endodontic origin, is focused on
removing the nidus of infection and preventing
reinfection. The objectives for treatment of MSEO
are removal of the pathogenic microorganisms,
their by-products, and pulpal debris from the
infected root canal system that are causing
the sinus infection. Appropriate treatment
options include non-surgical root canal therapy,
periradicular surgery when indicated, intentional
replantation, or extraction of the infected tooth.
Patients should be informed of all treatment
options and the prognosis of each option, to
include risks of no treatment.
Clinicians performing endodontic treatment in
the posterior maxillary dentition should have
extensive knowledge of maxillary root canal
anatomy, the necessary armamentarium, and
requisite clinical skill considering the anatomic
complexities and challenges in this region.
Endodontists are specialists in managing complex
root canal systems, and maxillary molars
typically have the most complex anatomy in
the dentition. Inadequate root canal treatment,
particularly missed mesio-buccal canal systems,
is a common cause of endodontic failure in
maxillary molars.48-51 The close anatomic
proximity of maxillary molar root apices to the
floor of the maxillary sinus can lead to persistent
or progressive MSEO if canals are left untreated
or root canal failure occurs in these teeth.
Clinicians should realize that persistent sinus
infection following endodontic treatment may be
due to deficiencies in endodontic or restorative
treatment, or due to periodontal disease52,53
, and
should critically evaluate these potential sources
of sinusitis prior to concluding that other forms of
medical or surgical intervention are indicated.
Use of systemic antibiotics to manage MSEO
should follow the guidelines set forth in the AAE
Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics in
Endodontics.54 Apart from spreading infections,
antibiotic therapy is unwarranted in the
treatment of MSEO and utterly ineffective as
a definitive solution. While antibiotic therapy
may offer temporary relief of symptoms by
improving sinus clearing, and may be indicated
for rapidly spreading infections, their sole use is
inappropriate without definitive debridement
and disinfection of the root canal system. In cases
of MSEO, antibiotic therapy should not be used
in lieu of endodontic treatment or removal of the
infected root canal system.
Similarly, surgical intervention of the maxillary
sinus that is focused strictly on removing
diseased sinus tissue and establishing drainage
is inadequate if the endodontic component
is neglected. Although these procedures are
performed with the goal of re-establishing sinus
aeration and drainage, and may provide relief
of some symptoms, it is well documented that
[[PAGE 7]]
Position StatementPage 7AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
neglecting the dental etiology and focusing
only on medical and surgical therapies of the
ostiomeatal complex (OMC) will not resolve
MSEO.15,55-57 The dental literature provides
numerous case reports showing full resolution of
MSEO following endodontic treatment.2,16,19-22,58-62
It should be noted, however, that thorough dental
treatment alone may not resolve all cases of
MSEO, therefore clinical and radiological follow-
up is essential as concomitant management of
the associated rhinosinusitis by an ENT specialist
may be necessary in some cases.15,37,59,60,63-66
Tomamatsu60 et al. evaluated 39 patients with
MSEO associated with full unilateral maxillary
sinus obstruction who underwent initial
treatment of endodontic therapy or extraction.
Twenty patients showed full resolution of
maxillary sinus obstruction and sinusitis
symptoms without requiring sinus surgery. The
remaining 19 patients required adjunctive sinus
surgery which resolved the sinusitis. The primary
finding in this study was that the non-effective
group displayed a significantly narrower aperture
width of the OMC, suggesting it may be a predictor
of the effectiveness of initial dental treatment
of MSEO. In contrast to earlier studies that
recommend contemporaneous dental treatment
and sinus surgery for management of all cases
of odontogenic sinusitis67-69
, the Tomamatsu
study strongly supports the AAE’s position
for managing MSEO by treating the primary
endodontic infection first, followed by clinical
and radiological assessment, and then proceeding
with additional sinus surgical procedures only
for recalcitrant cases, even in cases of total
sinus obstruction. Contemporaneous dental
and surgical sinus treatment with appropriate
antibiotics should only be considered in severely
acute cases requiring immediate drainage.
Collectively, the literature strongly supports
the need for a collaborative effort and open
referral relationship between the ENT surgeon
and the endodontic specialist to achieve the best
outcomes for patients with MSEO. Directions for
future research may include the incidence and
progression of sinus disease in MSEO, specific
pathological alterations to sinus mucosal tissues
induced by endodontic disease, and potential
indicators for adjunctive antibiotic use, medical
treatments, or surgical sinus treatment following
endodontic therapy in the management of MSEO.
Conclusion
It is important to recognize that MSEO is
fundamentally an endodontic infection
manifesting in the maxillary sinus. This
condition is different from sinogenic sinusitis,
with an entirely different pathogenesis and
treatment regimen. Although the symptoms
and radiographic signs of MSEO may mimic
sinogenic sinusitis and lead patients to first seek
care from their primary care physicians or ENT
specialists, medical treatment will not resolve
MSEO if the endodontic source is overlooked.
MSEO is also frequently overlooked in general
dental practice due to a lack of dental symptoms
and an obscured or atypical radiographic
presentation. The increased availability of in-
office CBCT has increased clinicians’ recognition
and ability to diagnose MSEO. Clinical endodontic
examination, however, remains essential for
correct diagnosis. Endodontists are uniquely
trained and equipped to diagnose and properly
manage endodontic disease that manifests in the
maxillary sinus. Improved communication and
referral relationships between ENT surgeons and
endodontic specialists are essential to provide
appropriate patient care when managing MSEO.
[[PAGE 8]]
Position StatementPage 8AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
References
1. Bauer WH. Maxillary sinusitis of dental
origin. Am J Orthod Oral Surg 1943;29:133-51.
2. Abrahams JJ, Glassberg RM. Dental disease: a
frequently unrecognized cause of maxillary
sinus abnormalities? Am J Roentenol
1996;166:1219-23.
3. Mattila K. Roentgenological investigations of
the relationship between periapical lesions
and conditions of the mucous membrane of
the maxillary sinuses. Acta Odontolog Scand
1965;23:42-6.
4. Obayashi, N., Ariji, Y., Goto, M. et al. Spread
of odontogenic infection originating in the
maxillary teeth: computerized tomographic
assessment. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2004;98:223–31.
5. Maloney PL, Doku HC. Maxillary sinusitis
of odontogenic origin. J Can Dent Assoc
1968;34:591-603.
6. Kretzschmar DP, Kretzschmar JL.
Rhinosinusitis: Review from a dental
perspective. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2003;96:128-35.
7. Mehra P, Murad H. Maxillary sinus disease
of odontogenic origin. Otolarngol Clin North
Am 2004;37:347-64.
8. Cymerman JJ, Cymerman DH, O’Dwyer RS.
Evaluation of odontogenic maxillary sinusitis
using cone-beam computed tomography:
three case reports. J Endod 2011;37:1465-9.
9. Lanza DC, Kennedy DW. Adult rhinosinusitis
defined. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1997;117:1-7.
10. Fleming, WE. The effect of chronic pyogenic
infections on the maxillary sinus. Qld Dent J
1954;6:78-82.
11. Melen I, Lindahl L, Andreasson L,
Rundcrantz H. Chronic maxillary sinusitis.
Definition, diagnosis and relation to
dental infections and nasal polyposis. Acta
Otolaryngol 1986;101:320-7.
12. Maillet M, Bowles WR, McClanahan,
SL. Cone-Beam computed tomography
evaluation of maxillary sinusitis. J Endod
2011;37:753-57.
13. Bomelli SR, Branstetter BF, Ferguson, BF.
Frequency of a dental source for acute
maxillary sinusitis, Laryngoscope 2009;
119(3):580-84.
14. Matsumoto Y, Ikeda T, Yokoi H, et al.
Association between odontogenic infections
and unilateral sinus opacification. Auris
Nasus Larynx 2015;42:288-93.
15. Patel NA, Ferguson BJ. Odontogenic sinusitis:
an ancient but under-appreciated cause of
maxillary sinusitis. Curr Opin Otoloaryngol
Head Neck Surg 2012;20:24-8.
16. Longhini AB, Ferguson BJ. Clinical aspects
of odontogenic maxillary sinusitis: a case
series. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 2011;1:409–
15.
17. Pokorny A, Tataryn R. Clinical and radiologic
findings in a case series of maxillary sinusitis
of dental origin. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol
2013;3:973-9.
18. Seldon HS, August DS. Maxillary sinus
involvement – an endodontic complication.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod 1970;30:117-22.
19. Seldon HS. The interrelationship between
the maxillary sinus and endodontics. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
1974;38:623-9.
20. Seldon HS. The endo-antral syndrome.
J Endod 1977;3:462-4.
21. Nenzen B, Welander U. The effect of
conservative root canal therapy on local
mucosal hyperplasia in the maxillary sinus.
Odontol Revy 1967;18:295-302.
22. Dodd RB, Dodds RN, Hocomb JB. An
endodontically induced maxillary sinusitis.
J Endod 1984;10:504-6.
[[PAGE 9]]
Position StatementPage 9AAE Position Statement– Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
23. Bertrand B, Rombaux P, Eloy P, Reychler
H. Sinusitis of dental origin. Acta
Otorhinolaryngol Belg 1997;51;315-22.
24. Rosenfeld RM, Piccirillo JF, Chandrasekhar
SS, et al. Clinical practice guideline (update):
Adult sinusitis executive summary.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2015;152:598–
609.
25. Legert KG, Zimmerman M, Stierna
P. Sinusitis of odontogenic origin:
pathophysiological implications of early
treatment. Acta Otolaryngol 2004;124:655-63.
26. Lindahl L, Melen I, Ekedahl C, Holm SE.
Chronic maxillary sinusitis. Differential
diagnosis and genesis. Acta Otolaryngol
1982;93:147-50.
27. Kondrashev PA, Lodochkina OE, Opryshko
ON. Microbiological spectrum of causative
agents of rhinogenic and odontogenic
chronic sinusitis and mucociliary activity of
mucosal epithelium in the nasal cavity. Vestn
Otorinolaringol 2010;4:45-7.
28. Eufinger H, Machtens E. Purulent
pansinusitis, orbital cellulitis and rhinogenic
intracranial complications. J Cranio
Maxillofac Surg 2001;29:111-7.
29. Wagenmann M, Naclerio RM. Complications
of sinusitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1992;90:552-4.
30. Gold RS, Sager E. Pansinusitis, orbital
cellulitis, and blindness as sequelae of
delayed treatment of dental abscess. J Oral
Surg 1974;32:40-3.
31. Park CH, Jee DH, La TY. A case of
odontogenic orbital cellulitis causing
blindness and severe tension orbit. J Korean
Med Sci 2013;28:340-3.
32. De Lima CO, Devito KL, Vasconselos LR, et
al. Correlation between endodontic infection
and periodontal disease and their association
with chronic sinusitis: A clinical-tomographic
study. J Endod 2017;43:1978-83.
33. Zirk M, Dreiseidler T, Pohl M, et al.
Odontogenic sinusitis maxillaris: A
retrospective study of 121 cases with surgical
intervention. J Craniomaxillofac Surg
2017;45:520-5.
34. Lechian JR, Filleul O, Costa de Araujo P, et al.
Chronic maxillary rhinosinusitis of dental
origin: A systematic review of 674 patient
cases. Int J Otolaryngol 2014;2014:465173.
Epub
35. Taschieri S, Torretta S, Corbella S, et al.
Pathophysiology of sinusitis of odontogenic
origin. J Investig Clin Dent 2017;8(2).
36. Williams JW, Simel DL, Roberts L, Samsa GP.
Clinical evaluation for sinusitis: making the
diagnosis by history and physical evaluation.
Ann Intern Med 1992;117:705-10.
37. Workman AD, Granquist EJ, Adappa ND.
Odontogenic sinusitis: developments in
diagnosis, microbiology, and treatment. Curr
Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2018;26:27-
33.
38. Ball RL, Barbizam JV, Cohenca N.
Intraoperative endodontic applications of
cone-beam computed tomography. J Endod
2013;39:548–57.
39. Lofthag-Hansen S, Huumonen S, Grondahl
K, et al. Limited cone-beam CT and intraoral
radiography for the diagnosis of periapical
pathology. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2007;103:114-9.
40. Low, K.M., Dula, K., Burgin, W., and von Arx,
T. Comparison of periapical radiography and
limited cone-beam tomography in posterior
maxillary teeth referred for apical surgery.
J Endod 2008;34:557–62.
41. Shahbazian M, Vandewoude C, Wyatt
J, Jacobs R. Comparative assessment of
periapical radiography and CBCT imaging
for radiodiagnostics in posterior maxilla.
Odontology 2015;103:97–104.
[[PAGE 10]]
Position StatementPage 10AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
42. Nunes CA, Guedes OA, Alencar AH, et
al. Evaluation of periapical lesions and
their association with maxillary sinus
abnormalities on cone-beam computed
tomographic images. J Endod 2016;42:42-6.
43. Worth HM, Stoneman DW. Radiographic
interpretation of antral mucosal changes due
to localized dental infection. J Can Dent Assoc
1972;38:111-6.
44. Tataryn RW. Surgical endodontics and
the maxillary sinus. In: Torabinejad M,
Rubinstein R (eds). The art and science of
contemporary surgical endodontics. Chicago,
IL: Quintessence. 203-22.
45. Tataryn RW. Rhinosinusitis and endodontic
disease. In: Ingle JI, Bakland LK,
Baumgartner JC (eds). Ingle’s Endodontics, ed
6. Hamilton, ON: BC Decker. 626-37.
46. Kakehashi S, Stanley HR, Fitzgerald RJ. The
effects of surgical exposures of dental pulps
in germ-free and conventional laboratory
rats. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 1965;20:340-9.
47. Gomes AC, Nejaim Y, Silva AIV, et al.
Influence of endodontic treatment and
coronal restoration on status of periapical
tissues: A cone-beam computed tomographic
study. J Endod 2015;41:1614-8.
48. Wolcott J, Ishley D, Kennedy W, et al.
A 5 yr clinical investigation of second
mesiobuccal canals in endodontically treated
and retreated maxillary molars. J Endod
2005;31:262-4.
49. Cleghorn BM, Christie WH, Dong CC. Root
and root canal morphology of the human
permanent maxillary first molar: a literature
review. J Endod 2006;32:813-21.
50. Verma P, Love RM. A micro CT study of
the mesiobuccal root canal morphology of
the maxillary first molar tooth. Int Endod J
2011;44:210-7.
51. Degerness RA, Bowles WR. Dimension,
anatomy and morphology of the mesiobuccal
root canal system in maxillary molars.
J Endod 2010;36:985-9.
52. Falk H, Ericson S, Hugoson A. The effects of
periodontal treatment on mucous membrane
thickening in the maxillary sinus. J Clin
Periodontol 1986;13:217-22.
53. Engström H, Chamberlain D, Kiger R,
Egelberg J. Radiographic evaluation of the
effect of initial periodontal therapy on
thickness of the maxillary sinus mucosa.
J Periodontol 1988;59:604-8.
54. Fouad AF, Byrne BE, Diogenes AR, et al. AAE
Guidance on the Use of Systemic Antibiotics
in Endodontics. Association of Endodontists
Position Statement 2017:1-8.
55. Cartwright S, Hopkins C. Odontogenic
sinusitis an underappreciated diagnosis: Our
experience. Clin Otolaryngol 2016;41:284-5.
56. Kulacz R., Fishman G, Levine H. An
unsuccessful sinus surgery caused by
dental involvement within the floor of the
maxillary sinus. Op Techniques Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 2004;15:2-3.
57. Longhini AB, Branstetter BF, Ferguson
BJ. Unrecognized odontogenic maxillary
sinusitis: A cause of endoscopic sinus surgery
failure. Am J Rhinol Allergy 2010;24:296-300.
58. Bogaerts P, Hanssens JF, Siquet JP. Healing
of maxillary sinusitis of odontogenic
origin following conservative endodontic
retreatment: case reports. Acta
Otorhinolaryngol Belg 2003;57:91-7.
59. Wang KL, Nichols BG, Poetker DM, Loehrl
TA. Odontogenic sinusitis: a case series
studying diagnosis and management. Int
Forum Allergy Rhinol 2015;5:597-601.
60. Tomomatsu N, Uzawa N, Aragaki T, Harada
K. Aperture width of the osteomeatal
complex as a predictor of successful
treatment of odontogenic maxillary sinusitis.
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2014;43:1386-90.
61. Bendyk-Szeffer M, Lagocka R, Trusewicz M,
et al. Perforating internal root resorption
repaired with mineral trioxide aggregate
caused complete resolution of odontogenic
sinus mucositis: A case report. J Endod
2015;41:274-8.
[[PAGE 11]]
The guidance in this statement is not intended to
substitute for a clinician’s independent judgment in light
of the conditions and needs of a specific patient.
Access additional resources at aae.org. © 2026 American Association of Endodontists (AAE).Position Statement
Page 11AAE Position Statement – Maxillary Sinusitis of Endodontic Origin
62. Nurbakhsh B, Friedman S, Kulkarni GV, et
al. Resolution of maxillary sinus mucositis
after endodontic treatment of maxillary
teeth with apical periodontitis: A cone-beam
computed tomographic pilot study. J Endod
2011;37:1504-11.
63. Brook I. Microbiology of acute and
chronic maxillary sinusitis associated
with an odontogenic origin. Laryngoscope
2005;115:823-5.
64. Simuntis R, Kubilius R, Vaitkus S.
Odontogenic maxillary sinusitis: a review.
Stomatologija 2014;16:39-43.
65. Saibene AM, Pipolo GC, Lozza P, et al.
Redefining boundaries in odontogenic
sinusitis: a retrospective evaluation of
extramaxillary involvement in 315 patients.
Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 2014;4:1020-3.
66. Mattos JL, Ferguson BJ, Lee S. Predictive
factors in patients undergoing endoscopic
sinus surgery for odontogenic sinusitis. Int
Forum Allergy Rhinol 2016;6:677-700.
67. Bertrand B, Rombaux P, Eloy P, Reychler
H. Sinusitis of dental origin. Acta
Otorhinolaryngol Belg 1997;51:315-22.
68. Costa F, Emanuelli E, Robiony M, et al.
Endoscopic surgical treatment of chronic
maxillary sinusitis of dental origin. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 2007;65:223-8.
69. Albu S, Baciut M. Failures in endoscopic
surgery of the maxillary sinus. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 2010;142:196-201.
Thank you to the Special Committee to develop
a Position Statement on Maxillary Sinusitis of
Endodontic Origin:
Roderick W. Tataryn, Chair
Michael J. Lewis
Anthony L. Horalek
Chase G. Thompson
Bruce Y. Cha, Board Liaison
Alan T. Pokorny, Physician (ENT) Consultant
