[[PAGE 1]]
Access additional resources at aae.orgAAE Endodontic Case Difficulty
Assessment Form and Guidelines
Patient Information
Full Name
Street Address Suite/Apt
City State/Country Zip
Phone
Email
Guidelines for Using the AAE Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form
The AAE designed the Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form for use in endodontic curricula. The Assessment Form makes case selection
more efficient, more consistent and easier to document. Dentists may also choose to use the Assessment Form to help with referral decision making
and record keeping.
Conditions listed in this form should be considered potential risk factors that may complicate treatment and adversely affect the outcome. Levels of
difficulty are sets of conditions that may not be controllable by the dentist. Risk factors can influence the ability to provide care at a consistently
predictable level and impact the appropriate provision of care and quality assurance.
The Assessment Form enables a practitioner to assign a level of difficulty to a particular case.
Consider using cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) for assessing moderate and high difficulty cases.
Levels of Difficulty
LOW DIFFICULTY
Preoperative condition indicates routine complexity (uncomplicated). These types of cases would exhibit only those factors listed in the LOW
DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a favorable treatment outcome should be attainable by a competent practitioner with limited experience.
MODERATE DIFFICULTY
Preoperative condition is complicated, exhibiting one or two factors listed in the MODERATE DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a favorable treatment
outcome may be challenging for a competent, experienced practitioner.
HIGH DIFFICULTY
Preoperative condition is exceptionally complicated, exhibiting three or more factors listed in the MODERATE DIFFICULTY category or at least one
in the HIGH DIFFICULTY category. Achieving a favorable treatment outcome may be challenging for even the most experienced practitioner with an
extensive history of favorable outcomes.
Review your assessment of each case to determine the level of difficulty. If the level of difficulty exceeds your experience and comfort, you might
consider referral to an endodontist.
Disposition
Treat in Office: Yes No
Refer Patient to:
Date
Criteria and Subcriteria LOW DIFFICULTY MODERATE DIFFICULTY HIGH DIFFICULTY
A. PATIENT CONSIDERATIONS
MEDICAL HISTORY No medical problem (ASA Class 1 or 2*) One or more medical problem
(ASA Class 3*)
Complex medical history/serious illness/
disability (ASA Class 4*)
ANESTHESIA No history of anesthesia problems Vasoconstrictor intolerance Difficulty achieving and/or maintaining
anesthesia
PATIENT DISPOSITION Cooperative and compliant Anxious but cooperative Uncooperative
ABILITY TO OPEN MOUTH No limitation Slight limitation in opening Significant limitation in opening
GAG REFLEX None Gags occasionally with radiographs/
treatment
Extreme gag reflex which has
compromised past dental care
EMERGENCY CONDITION Minimum pain or swelling Moderate pain or swelling Severe pain or swelling
[[PAGE 2]]
B. DIAGNOSTIC AND TREATMENT CONSIDERATIONS
DIAGNOSIS Signs and symptoms consistent with
recognized pulpal and periapical conditions
Extensive differential diagnosis of usual
signs and symptoms required
Confusing and complex signs and
symptoms: difficult diagnosis
History of chronic oral/facial pain
RADIOGRAPHIC DIFFICULTIES Minimal difficulty obtaining/interpreting
radiographs
Moderate difficulty obtaining/interpreting
radiographs (e.g., high floor of mouth,
narrow or low palatal vault, presence of tori)
Extreme difficulty obtaining/interpreting
radiographs (e.g., superimposed
anatomical structures)
POSITION IN THE ARCH –
TOOTH TYPE
Anterior/premolar 1st molar 2nd or 3rd molar
POSITION IN THE ARCH –
INCLINATION
Slight inclination (<10°) Moderate inclination (10-30°) Extreme inclination (>30°)
POSITION IN THE ARCH –
ROTATION
Slight rotation (<10°) Moderate rotation (10-30°) Extreme rotation (>30°)
TOOTH ISOLATION Routine rubber dam placement Simple pretreatment modification required
for rubber dam isolation
Extensive pretreatment modification
required for rubber dam isolation
CROWN MORPHOLOGY Normal original crown morphology Full coverage restoration
Porcelain restoration
Bridge abutment
Moderate deviation from normal tooth/root
form (e.g., taurodontism microdens)
Teeth with extensive coronal destruction
Restoration does not reflect original
anatomy/alignment
Significant deviation from normal tooth/
root form (e.g., fusion dens in dente)
CANAL MORPHOLOGY Slight or no curvature (<10°)
Closed apex (<1 mm in diameter)
Moderate curvature (10-30°)
Crown axis differs moderately from root
axis.
Apical opening 1-1.5 mm in diameter
C-shaped morphology
Extreme curvature (>30°) or S-shaped
curve
Mandibular premolar or anterior with 2
roots
Maxillary premolar with 3 roots
Canal divides in the middle or apical third
Very long tooth (>25 mm)
Other anomalies such as radix ento/para
molaris
Open apex (>1.5 mm in diameter)
RADIOGRAPHIC APPEARANCE
OF CANAL(S)
Canal(s) and chamber visible and not
reduced in size
Canal(s) and chamber visible but reduced
in size
Pulp stones
Indistinct canal path
Canal(s) and chamber not visible
PROXIMITY OF THE ROOT APICES
TO VITAL STRUCTURES SUCH AS
THE IAN OR MENTAL FORAMEN
Vital structures 5 or more millimeters from
apices
3-5 millimeters <3 millimeters
RESORPTION No resorption evident Minimal apical resorption Extensive apical resorption
Internal resorption
External resorption
C. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
TRAUMA HISTORY No history of trauma, or
Uncomplicated crown fracture of mature or
immature teeth
Complicated crown fracture of mature teeth
Subluxation
Complicated crown fracture of immature
teeth
Horizontal root fracture
Alveolar fracture
Intrusive, extrusive or lateral luxation
Avulsion
ENDODONTIC
TREATMENT HISTORY
No previous treatment Previous access without complications Previous access with complications (e.g.,
perforation, non-negotiated canal, ledge,
separated instrument)
Previous surgical or nonsurgical
endodontic treatment completed
PERIODONTAL-ENDODONTIC
CONDITION
None or mild periodontal disease or
concurrent moderate periodontal disease
Combined endodontic/periodontic lesion Concurrent severe periodontal disease
Cracked teeth with periodontal
complications
Root amputation prior to endodontic
treatment
Criteria and Subcriteria LOW DIFFICULTY MODERATE DIFFICULTY HIGH DIFFICULTY
The contribution of the Canadian Academy of Endodontics and others to the development of this form is gratefully acknowledged. The AAE Endodontic Case Difficulty Assessment Form is designed to aid the practitioner in
determining appropriate case disposition. The American Association of Endodontists neither expressly nor implicitly warrants any positive results associated with the use of this form. This form may be reproduced but may
not be amended or altered in any way. © American Association of Endodontists, 180 N. Stetson Ave., Suite 1500, Chicago, IL 60601; Phone: 800-872-3636 or 312-266-7255; Fax: 866-451-9020 or 312-266-9867;
E-mail: info@aae.org; Website: aae.org
*American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Classification System Class 1: No systemic illness. Patient healthy. Class 2: Patient with mild degree of systemic illness, but without functional restrictions, e.g., well-controlled
hypertension. Class 3: Patient with severe degree of systemic illness which limits activities, but does not immobilize the patient. Class 4: Patient with severe systemic illness that immobilizes and is sometimes life threatening.
Class 5: Patient will not survive more than 24 hours whether or not surgical intervention takes place. www.asahq.org/clinical/physicalstatus.htm
Access additional resources at aae.org
