1. Int J Oral Sci. 2025 Jan 2;17(1):2. doi: 10.1038/s41368-024-00334-8.

Expert consensus on apical microsurgery.

Wang H(#)(1), Xu X(#)(2), Bian Z(3), Liang J(4), Chen Z(3), Hou B(5), Qiu L(6), 
Chen W(7), Wei X(8), Hu K(9), Wang Q(10), Wang Z(11), Li J(2), Huang D(2), Wang 
X(12), Huang Z(13), Meng L(3), Zhang C(14), Xie F(7), Yang D(6), Yu J(15), Zhao 
J(16), Pan Y(17), Pan S(18), Yang D(19), Niu W(20), Zhang Q(21), Deng S(22), Ma 
J(23), Meng X(24), Yang J(25), Wu J(26), Du Y(27), Ling J(28), Yue L(29), Zhou 
X(30), Yu Q(31).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of 
Oral Diseases, Department of Operative Dentistry & Endodontics, School of 
Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Center for Stomatology & 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & Department of Cariology 
and Endodontics, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Regeneration, 
Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, Hubei Key Laboratory 
of Stomatology, Department of Endodontics, School & Hospital of Stomatology, 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Endodontics and Operative Dentistry, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine; College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University; National Center for Stomatology; 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases; Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(5)School of Stomatology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Endodontics, School of Stomatology, China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.
(7)College & Hospital of Stomatology, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, 
China.
(8)Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Hospital of Stomatology, 
Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-Sen University & Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Guangzhou, China.
(9)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, Xi'an 
Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and 
Regeneration, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi 
International Joint Research Center for Oral Diseases, Department of 
Periodontology, School of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, China.
(11)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University School and 
Hospital of Stomatology & National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices, Beijing, China.
(12)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University School and 
Hospital of Stomatology, National Center for Stomatology & National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices& Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital 
Stomatology & NHC Key Laboratory of Digital Stomatology & NMPA Key Laboratory 
for Dental Materials, Beijing, China.
(13)Department of Endodontics, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine; College of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, National Center 
for Stomatology; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(14)Department of Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(15)Department of Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(16)Department of Cariology and Endodontics, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(17)Department of Endodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(18)Department of Endodontics, School of Stomatology, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(19)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics, Shanghai 
Stomatological Hospital & School of Stomatology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Craniomaxillofacial Development and Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(20)Department of Endodontics, School of Stomatology, Dalian Medical University, 
Dalian, China.
(21)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Tooth Restoration and Regeneration & 
Tongji Research Institute of Stomatology & Department of Endodontics, 
Stomatological Hospital and Dental School, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(22)Stomatology Hospital, School of Stomatology, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Key 
Laboratory of Oral Biomedical Research of Zhejiang Province, Cancer Center of 
Zhejiang University, Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and 
Devices of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China.
(23)Department of Stomatology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(24)Department of Endodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.
(25)Department of Endodontics, The Affiliated Stomatological Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(26)Department of Endodontics, Affiliated Stomatological Hospital of Zunyi 
Medical University, Zunyi, China.
(27)Jinan Stomatological Hospital, Jinan, China.
(28)Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. lingjunqi@163.com.
(29)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University School and 
Hospital of Stomatology & National Center of Stomatology & National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases & National Engineering Laboratory for Digital 
and Material Technology of Stomatology & Beijing Key Laboratory of Digital 
Stomatology & Research Center of Engineering and Technology for Computerized 
Dentistry Ministry of Health & NMPA Key Laboratory for Dental Materials, 
Beijing, China. kqlinyue@bjmu.edu.cn.
(30)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Center for Stomatology & 
National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases & Department of Cariology 
and Endodontics, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, China. zhouxd@scu.edu.cn.
(31)State Key Laboratory of Oral & Maxillofacial Reconstruction and 
Regeneration, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shaanxi Key 
Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Department of Operative Dentistry & Endodontics, 
School of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. 
2535165@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Apical microsurgery is accurate and minimally invasive, produces few 
complications, and has a success rate of more than 90%. However, due to the lack 
of awareness and understanding of apical microsurgery by dental general 
practitioners and even endodontists, many clinical problems remain to be 
overcome. The consensus has gathered well-known domestic experts to hold a 
series of special discussions and reached the consensus. This document specifies 
the indications, contraindications, preoperative preparations, operational 
procedures, complication prevention measures, and efficacy evaluation of apical 
microsurgery and is applicable to dentists who perform apical microsurgery after 
systematic training.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41368-024-00334-8
PMCID: PMC11693765
PMID: 39743567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Informed consent: Patients (or their guardians) must be 
informed about the details of apical microsurgery and must provide informed 
consent prior to the procedure.


2. Braz Dent J. 2025 Dec 1;36:e256511. doi: 10.1590/0103-644020256511.
eCollection  2025.

Cyto-genotoxicity and immunomodulation in fibroblasts exposed to 
calcium-aluminate cement with different radiopacifiers.

[Article in Portuguese; Abstract available in Portuguese from the publisher]

Martorano AS(1), Messias NS(2), Bighetti-Trevisan RL(2), Teixeira LN(3), 
Oliveira IR(4), Raucci-Neto W(1), Oliveira PT(1), Castro-Raucci LMS(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Dentistry of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)School of Dentistry, University of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, SP, 
Brazil.
(3)Cell Biology and Oral Pathology Division, Faculdade São Leopoldo Mandic, 
Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(4)Institute for Research and Development, University of Vale do Paraíba, São 
José dos Campos,SP, Brazil.

Calcium aluminate cement (CAC) has been proposed as an alternative to mineral 
trioxide aggregate (MTA), but its biological behavior remains underexplored. 
This study evaluated the cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, and proinflammatory gene 
expression of fibroblasts exposed to CAC formulations containing zinc oxide or 
bismuth oxide with different proportions of calcium chloride, in comparison with 
MTA. Fibroblasts were cultured with CACz (25% ZnO + 2.8% CaCl₂), CACb (25% Bi₂O₃ 
+ 2.8% CaCl₂), CACb+ (25% Bi₂O₃ + 10% CaCl₂), or MTA; non-exposed cells served 
as controls. Cytotoxicity was assessed by fluorescence microscopy and MTT 
viability assays at 24 h and 72 h, while genotoxicity was evaluated by the comet 
assay at 24 h. Gene expression of COL-1, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and MMP-9 was 
examined by RT-qPCR at 72 h. Data were analyzed using the Kruskal-Wallis test 
and the Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc test (α = 0.05). Cell viability did not 
differ among groups at 24 h, but was higher for CACb+ at 72 h (p < 0.05). DNA 
damage levels were similar across groups (p > 0.05). For gene expression, no 
significant differences were observed for COL-1, IL-1β, or TNF-α. All cements 
upregulated IL-6 compared with control (p < 0.05), with the highest levels in 
MTA and the lowest in CACb+. CACb+ increased MMP-9 expression (p < 0.05), while 
CACz showed the lowest levels. Within the limits of this study, CAC formulations 
with additives were not genotoxic or cytotoxic, and their biological behavior 
was composition-dependent, with CACb+ demonstrating the most favorable profile 
by enhancing fibroblast viability and extracellular matrix remodeling potential.

Publisher: Cimento de aluminato de cálcio (CAC) tem sido proposto como 
alternativa ao agregado de trióxido mineral (MTA), porém seu comportamento 
biológico permanece pouco explorado. Este estudo avaliou a citotoxicidade, a 
genotoxicidade e a expressão de genes pró-inflamatórios em fibroblastos expostos 
a formulações de CAC contendo óxido de zinco ou óxido de bismuto, com diferentes 
proporções de cloreto de cálcio, em comparação ao MTA. Os fibroblastos foram 
cultivados com CACz (25% ZnO + 2,8% CaCl₂), CACb (25% Bi₂O₃ + 2,8% CaCl₂), CACb+ 
(25% Bi₂O₃ + 10% CaCl₂) ou MTA; células não expostas serviram como controles. A 
citotoxicidade foi avaliada por morfologia em fluorescência e ensaio de 
viabilidade MTT em 24 h e 72 h; a genotoxicidade, pelo ensaio do cometa em 24 h; 
e a expressão gênica de COL-1, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 e MMP-9 por RT-qPCR em 72 h. 
Os dados foram analisados pelo teste de Kruskal-Wallis, seguido do pós-teste de 
Student-Newman-Keuls (α = 0,05). A viabilidade celular não diferiu entre os 
grupos em 24 h, mas foi significativamente maior para o CACb+ em 72 h (p < 
0,05). Os níveis de dano ao DNA foram semelhantes entre os grupos (p > 0,05). 
Quanto à expressão gênica, não foram observadas diferenças significativas para 
COL-1, IL-1β ou TNF-α. Todos os cimentos aumentaram significativamente a 
expressão de IL-6 em comparação ao controle (p < 0,05), com os maiores níveis no 
MTA e os menores no CACb+. O CACb+ aumentou significativamente a expressão de 
MMP-9 (p < 0,05), enquanto o CACz apresentou os menores níveis. Dentro das 
limitações deste estudo, as formulações de CAC com aditivos não foram 
genotóxicas nem citotóxicas, e seu comportamento biológico foi dependente da 
composição, sendo que o CACb+ demonstrou o perfil mais favorável ao 
potencializar a viabilidade de fibroblastos e o remodelamento da matriz 
extracelular.

DOI: 10.1590/0103-644020256511
PMCID: PMC12696771
PMID: 41337506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: All authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


3. Int Endod J. 2023 Oct;56 Suppl 3:455-474. doi: 10.1111/iej.13838. Epub 2022
Oct  8.

Effectiveness of adjunct therapy for the treatment of apical periodontitis: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Meire MA(1), Bronzato JD(2), Bomfim RA(3), Gomes BPFA(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Endodontology, Department of Oral Health Sciences, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Division of Endodontics, Department of Restorative Dentistry, Piracicaba 
Dental School, State University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(3)Department of Community Health, School of Dentistry, Federal University of 
Mato Grosso do Sul, Campo Grande, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Adjunct therapy refers to any intracanal procedure going beyond 
chemomechanical preparation with instruments and traditionally delivered 
irrigants (excluding interim dressings). It is not clear whether and which of 
these adjunct therapies have a significant impact on the outcome of root canal 
treatment [healing of apical periodontitis (AP) and other patient-related 
outcomes].
OBJECTIVES: This systematic review aimed to analyse available evidence on the 
effectiveness of adjunct therapy for the treatment of AP in permanent teeth, 
according to a population, intervention, comparison, outcome, time and study 
design framework formulated a priori by the European Society of Endodontology.
METHODS: Five electronic databases (PubMed, Embase, Scopus, Cochrane and Web of 
Science) were searched up to October 2021 to identify clinical studies comparing 
adjunct therapy to no adjunct therapy in adult patients with AP. Animal studies, 
reviews, studies with less than 10 patients per arm and studies with a follow-up 
time of less than 1 year, or less than 7 days for postoperative pain, were 
excluded. The quality of the included studies was appraised by the appropriate 
tools [Risk of Bias 2 (RoB2) for randomized clinical trials (RCTs) and 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for observational studies]. Meta-analysis was performed 
using a random-effects model. The certainty of the evidence was assessed using 
the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) 
approach.
RESULTS: Fourteen studies (13 RCTs and one retrospective cohort) fulfilled the 
inclusion criteria for this review. They evaluated different types of adjunct 
therapy: antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT; three studies), diode laser 
canal irradiation (3), Nd:YAG laser canal irradiation (2), Er;Cr:YSGG laser 
canal irradiation (1), ozone therapy (2) and ultrasonically activated irrigation 
(UAI) (4). Radiographical healing was reported in seven studies, but 
meta-analysis was only possible for UAI (two studies), showing no statistically 
significant difference in healing after 12 months. Pain after 7 days was 
reported in seven studies. Meta-analysis on three studies that used aPDT and on 
two studies using diode laser irradiation showed no significant difference in 
the prevalence of pain after 7 days between the control and adjunct therapy. 
According to RoB2 tool, six studies had a high risk of bias, five studies had 
some concerns, and two studies low risk of bias. The GRADE assessment revealed a 
very low strength of evidence for diode laser, and low strength of evidence for 
PDT, ozone and UAI studies.
DISCUSSION: The included studies displayed significant heterogeneity in terms of 
type of adjunct therapy, technical details per adjunct therapy, outcome 
reporting and several combinations of these, limiting the potential for 
meta-analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: There is insufficient evidence to recommend any adjunctive therapy 
for the treatment of apical periodontitis.
REGISTRATION: Prospero CRD42021261869.

© 2022 British Endodontic Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iej.13838
PMID: 36156804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]